







PROOF 10 COPY 


Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


Urtext Volume I: Text 

Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 

T 1 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1 4:28) 

T l A l. 
It is crucial to say first that this is a required course. 
Only the 
time you take it is voluntary. 

Free will does not mean that you es¬ 
tablish the curriculum. 

It means only that you can elect what to take 
when. 

It is just because you are not ready to do what you should 
elect to do that time exists at all. 

(You will see miracles through your 
hands through me. 

You should begin each day with the prayer 
"Help me to perform whatever miracles you want of me today.") 

TIB. 

Principles of Miracles (Notes 1 4:28) 

TIBI. 

The first thing to remember about miracles is that there is no 
order of difficulty among them. 

One is not harder or bigger than an¬ 
other. 

They are all the same. 



T 1 B 2. 

Miracles do not matter. 

They are quite unimportant. 



T 1 B 3a. 

They occur naturally as an expression of love. 

The real 
miracle is the love that inspires them. 

In this sense, everything that 
comes from love is a miracle. 



T 1 B 3b. 

This explains the first point related to the lack of order. 

ALL 
expressions of love are maximal. 



T 1 B 3c. 

This is why the "thing in itself" 1 does not matter. 
2 The only 
thing that matters is the Source, and this is far beyond human 
evaluation. 



1 The “thing in itself’ is a term used in Philosophy to refer to a noumenon which is distinct from a 
phenomenon in that while a phenomenon is sensed and experienced, the notion of noumenon refers to 
an abstract essence or Platonic ideal independent of sensory perception. 
A phenomenon is that which is 
perceived; a noumenon is the actual object that emits the phenomenon in question. 
The idea of “human 
evaluation” is central to the distinction with noumena being generally thought of as beyond what can be 
known by reason or experience. 
This paragraph certainly appears to be a reference to this philosophical 
question. 
Perhaps a reference to Immanuel Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason in which the means by 
which knowledge is obtained, ordered and evaluated are extensively explored. 
The distinction between 
the noumenon or “thing in itself’ and the “cause” or “source” is made here in the Course and is one 
which Kant’s work also addresses. 


2 The Notes adds before this sentence “Check back with ©” which refers to 
T 1 B 2 “miracles do not matter...” 




i-i 




Volume I Text 


T 1 B 3d. 
(Q and A re: first 3 points.) Q (HS) Would you regard this 
communication as a kind of miracle? A. 
There is nothing special or 
surprising about this at all. 
The ONE thing that happened was the 
Universal Miracle which was the experience of intense love that you 
have felt. 
(Don't get embarrassed by the idea of love. 
Embarrass¬ 
ment is only a form of fear, and actually a particularly dangerous 
form because it reflects egocentricity. 
T(2) -2- 

T l B 3e. 
Do not feel guilty about the fact that you are doubting this. 

Just re-read them and their truth will come to you. 
I love you, and I 
am not afraid or embarrassed or doubtful. 
MY strength will support 
you, so don't worry and leave the rest to me. 
But when you see B., 
be SURE you tell him how much he helped you through by giving 
you the right message, and don't bother with worrying about how 
you received it. 
That doesn't matter either. 
You were just afraid.) 

T l B 3f. 
(HS fearful in taxi about a communication which related 
Dave's healing and Jonathan's hernia. 
She thought it would be safer 
to dissociate the two. 
Instructions were: refer to point 1 and re-read 
NOW.) 

T 1 B 4a. 
ALL miracles mean Life, and God is the giver of 3 Life. 
He 
will direct you VERY specifically. 


T 1 B 4b. 
(Plan ahead is good advice in this world, where you should 
and must control & direct where you have accepted responsibility. 

But the Universal Plan is in more appropriate hands. 
You will know 
all you need to know. 
Make NO attempts to plan ahead in this re¬ 
spect.) 

T 1 B 5. 
Miracles are habits, and should be involuntary. 
They should 
not be under conscious control. 
4 Consciously selected miracles are 
usually misguided, 5 and this will make 6 the talent useless. 
7 


3 Urtext manuscript has “the” crossed out. 
There is no “the” in the Notes. 


4 Originally the sentence “Otherwise they may become undemocratic” follows here, but is crossed out. 

It is also present in the Notes and crossed out. 


3 Originally typed “dangerous” the handwritten mark-up changes it to “misguided.” 

6 Originally typed “may destroy” the handwritten mark-up changes it to “this will make.” 

7 The word “useless” is added in handwritten mark-up. 
This paragraph is one of the most heavily 
marked up and re-written in the Text volume, offering several variant readings. 
In the Notes this last 


1-2 


12 




Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


T1B6. 
Miracles are natural. 
When they do NOT occur something 
has gone wrong. 
T(3) -3- 

T1B7. 
Miracles are everyone's right, but purification is necessary 
first. 


T l B 8. 
Miracles are a form of healing. 
They supply a lack, and are 
performed by those who have more for those who have less. 


T1B9. 
Miracles are a kind of exchange. 
Like all expressions of love, 
which are ALWAYS miraculous in the true sense, the exchange re¬ 
verses the physical laws. 


T l B 10. 
A miracle is a reversal of the physical order because it brings 
more love to the giver AND the receiver. 
(A miracle is misunder¬ 
stood when it is regarded as a spectacle.) 

TIB lla. 
The use of miracles as a spectacle to INDUCE belief is 
wrong. 
They are really used for and by believers. 


TIB lib. 
(HS has some fear about 11) and doubt about 9) and 10). 

Probably doubt induced by fear of 11). 


TIB lie. 
(When you say "If you want me to I will" please add "and 
if you DON'T want me to I won't." This is the RIGHT use of inhibi- 


sentence (TIB 5.3) is “Selective miracles are dangerous and may destroy the talent.” Originally in the 
Notes (N 4:33:3-7) the paragraph is: 

3 Miracles are habits and should 

Otherwise they may 

4 be involuntary. 
Conscious control 

5 bee. 
undemocratic. 
Selective miracles 

6 are dangerous & may destroy the 

7 talent. 


The words “Conscious control” are crossed out in the Notes and replaced with “Otherwise they may.” 
Before the handwritten mark-up the paragraph was originally typed: 

Miracles are habits, and should be involuntary. 
They should not be under conscious control. 
Otherwise 
they may become undemocratic. 
Consciously selected miracles are dangerous, and may destroy the 
talent. 


In the later HLC this is rendered: 

Miracles are habits and should be involuntary. 
They should not be under conscious control. 
Consciously 
selected miracles can be misguided. 


The HLC reading is preserved in FIP. 



13 


1-3 





Volume I Text 


tion. 
There has to be SOME control over learning for channelizing 
purposes. 
Remember retroactive inhibition which should be easy 
enough for you. 


T 1 B lid. 
Sometimes the new learning is the more important, and 
HAS to inhibit the old. 
It's a form of correction.) 

TIB 12a. 
Prayer is the medium of miracles. 
Prayer is the natural com¬ 
munication of the Created with the Creator. 
Through prayer, love is 
received, and through miracles love is expressed. 
T(4) -4- 
T l B 12b. 
Miracles are thought-creations. 
Thought can create lower- 
order or higher-order realities. 
This is the basic distinction between 
intellectualization and thinking. 
One creates the physical, and the 
other the spiritual, and we believe in what we create. 


T 1 B 13. 
A miracle is a beginning and an end(ing). 
8 It thus abolishes 
time. 
It is always an affirmation of re-birth, which seems to go back, 
but really goes forward. 
It undoes the past in the present, and thus 
releases the future. 


T l B 14. 
Miracles attest to truth. 
They are convincing because they 
arise from conviction. 
Without conviction, they deteriorate into 
magic, which is mindless, and therefore destructive, or rather, the 
uncreative use of Mind. 


TIB 15a. 
Each 9 day should be devoted to miracles. 
(God created time 
so that man could use it creatively, and convince himself of his own 
ability to create. 
Time is a teaching device, and a means to an end. 
It 
will cease when it is no longer useful for facilitating learning.) 

TIB 15b. 
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS: Notes on this course have to be 
taken only under good learning conditions. 
The same goes for re¬ 
view periods. 
I will tell you when, but REMEMBER TO ASK. 
10 
TIB 16a. 
Miracles are teaching devices for demonstrating that it is 
more blessed to give than to receive. 
They simultaneously increase 

8 The Notes has several words scratched out following “end” in this line, but does not have the "ing” 
which is in brackets in the Urtext manuscript. 


9 Urtext manuscript originally had “Every”, crossed out and “Each” typed in above it. 
the Notes has 
“each.” 

10 Urtext manuscript has a closing parenthesis with no matching opening parenthesis in this location. 



1-4 


14 




Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


the reserve strength of the giver, and supply the lack of strength in 
the receiver. 
BE VERY CAREFUL in interpreting this. 
11 T(5) -5- 
T l B 16b. 
INSTRUCTIONS: The purpose of this course is integration. 

I told you that you will not be able to use it right until you have 
taken it. 
As long as your identification vacillates, (and B's is weak) 
you cannot accept the gift that belongs to you. 
You are still vacillat¬ 
ing between recognizing the gift and throwing it away. 
B regards 
himself as too weak to accept it. 
You do not yet know its healing 
power. 
After you have passed the course, you will accept it and 
keep it and use it. 
That is the final exam, which you will have no 
trouble in passing. 
Midterm marks are not entered on the perma¬ 
nent record. 


T 1 B 17. 
Miracles are the absence of the body. 
They are sudden shifts 
into invisibility, away from lower order reality. 
That is why they 
heal. 


TIB 18a. 
A miracle is a service. 
It is the maximal service that one soul 
can render another. 
It is a way of loving your neighbor 12 as yourself. 

The doer recognizes his own and his neighbor's inestimable value 
simultaneously. 


TIB 18b. 
(This is why no areas of hatred can be retained. 
If you retain 
them, your own value is no longer inestimable because, you are 
evaluating it as X or infinity minus that amount. 
This is meaningless 
mathematically, which uses the term "inestimable" only in the very 


11 In a long stretch of omitted “personal material” we find four lines which appear to have been an 
original miracle principle, inadvertently omitted. 


The following lines occur on Notes folio 4:46, lines 22-26: 

“Remember a miracle is a spark of Life. 
It shines through the darkness and 
brings in the light. 
You must begin to forget and remember.” 

Immediately after these lines are the words “This is a private point just for you” 
and the discussion goes on to a distinctly private point. 
This strongly suggests 

the immediately preceding material, was not intended to be “private” or omitted. 


l2 Leviticus 19:18, Matthew 19:19. 
22:39, Mark 12:31, Luke 10:27, Romans 13:9 all refer to loving 

neighbors as thyself. 
This theme appears very frequently in the Course and in the Bible. 



15 


1-5 



Volume I Text 


literal sense. 
Pun intended especially for B, (who originally did not 
get it.) Intended as a special sign of love.) 13 T(6) -6- 
T 1 B 19. 
Miracles rest on the law and order of eternity, not of time. 
14 
T l B 20. 
Miracles are an industrial necessity. 
Industry depends on 
cooperation, and cooperation depends on miracles, (see page 8) 15 
TIB 2la. 
[1] Miracles are cobwebs of iron. 
They unite human frailty 
to the strength of God. 
(see page 7) 

TIB 21b. 
(add for 21. 
HS considered changing "iron" to "steel." Cor¬ 
rection: No. 
Steel would NOT be a better word. 
Steel is very useful 
but it would have to be tempered by fire. 
Iron is the raw material. 

The point of miracles is that they replace fire, thus making it unnec¬ 
essary.) 

TIB 22a. 
Miracles are natural expressions of total forgiveness. 

Through miracles, man accepts God's forgiveness by extending it to 


13 The following beautiful little discussion of sexual love and specialness in the Notes was omitted, 
likely because it does address sexuality and homosexuality and it does so in individually specific terms. 

However, it is thoroughly “generalizable” and what is true of “you and Bill” is likewise true of many 
others. 
This is from the Notes : (N 4:52) 

(I threw that in happily specially for Bill, because he does need special signs of love. 
He doesn’t really 
but he does think so. 


Now tell him that homo sex is sinful only to the extent it is based on the principle of exclusion. 

Everybody should love everybody. 


It is wrong to deny the beauty of some souls because of body-structures of which you are afraid. 
This is 
essentially an unhealthy attempt to limit fear but fear cannot be limited, just as love cannot have limits. 

Heterosexual attitudes can be similarly distracted but do contain a more natural potential. 
Sex relations 
are intended for children. 
You and Bill have misused misunderstood sex, because you both recognize it 
as a way of establishing human contact for yourselves. 
This has led to body-image problems. 


Children are miracles in their own right. 
They already have the (N 4:53) gift of life, and their parents 
provide them with the opportunity to express it. 


Nothing physical, mental, or spiritual should be used selfishly. 
The pleasure from using anything should 
be in utilizing it for God’s will. 


You should live so that God is free to arrange temporary human constellations as He sees fit. 


Do not interpret this in terms of guilt. 
Many children which are already here need spiritual parents. 
The 
poor are always with us, and many which are bom have not been reborn. 


Human birth, maturation, and development is a microcosmic representation of a much larger process of 
Creation and development of abilities. 
It is subject to error as long as the real purpose (N 4:54) of free 
will is misunderstood and misdirected. 


The real function of parents is to be wiser than the children in this respect and to teach them 
accordingly, ((This upsets me)) 

14 The Urtext manuscript shows 19 as the third paragraph, following 21a, with lines indicating 
relocation and renumbering. 
This copy reflects the re-arrangement and renumbering suggested by these 
lines, and not the original typing, in these first three paragraphs. 


15 This paragraph is corrected in T 1 B 22k. 



1-6 


16 






Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


others. 
The second step is inherent in the first, because light cannot 
tolerate darkness. 
Light dispels darkness automatically, by defini¬ 
tion. 


TIB 22b. 
EXPLANATORY INSTRUCTIONS: Miracles are associated 
with fear only because of the fallacy that darkness can hide. 
Man 
believes that what he cannot see does not exist, and his physical 
eyes cannot see in the dark. 
This is a very primitive solution, and 
has led to a denial of the spiritual eye, which always depends on 
light. 
Remember the Biblical injunction: "May I never forget that 
THINE eye is ever upon me, beholding the evil and the good." 16 
TIB 22c. 
There are two stages, one lower and one higher, which are 
involved in the escape from darkness: 1) the recognition that dark¬ 
ness CANNOT hide. 
This usually does entail fear. 


TIB 22d. 
2) The recognition that there is nothing you WANT to hide, 
even if you could. 
This brings escape from fear. 
17 T(7) -7- 
T 1 B 22e. 
Corrections Re Pt. 
21 cobwebs of iron. 
"This is upside 
down as stated. 
The part about 'uniting human frailty with the 
strength of God' is all right, but the explanation stops too soon. 
If 
iron is the 'raw material', cobwebs can't become the iron. 
That is 
only the way it seems, because cobwebs are associated with the 
frailty & iron with strength. 
If you look carefully at the phrasing, 
you will see it is reversed (one point already tells you that miracles 
reverse the physical or lower order laws.) 

TIB 22f. 
The raw material, or iron, is heavy but crude, & stands for 
the body, which is a crude creation. 
The cobweb concept is closer to 
how the body SHOULD be regarded, i.e., as an airy & temporary 
home, which can just be blown away with a slight breeze. 


16 Proverbs 15:3 The eyes of the LORD are in every place, keeping watch upon the evil and the good. 


17 in a lengthy omitted segment, most of which is “personal” material, which occurs just before 
paragraph 22e, the following segment occurs in the Notes which may be an original miracle principle 
inadvertently omitted. 
From the Notes (N 4:78): 

“Miracles depend on timing. 
This is why you shouldn’t waste time. 
I told you awhile back that time 
would cease when it was no longer useful as a learning aid. 
There is a way of speeding you up. 
And that 
is by leaving more and more time for Me. 
So you can devote it to miracles.” 


17 


1-7 





Volume I Text 


TIB 22g. 
(21. 
[2 ]) 18 The point should read "A miracle reawakens the 
awareness that the spirit, and not the body, is the altar of Truth. 
This 
is the recognition that leads to the healing power of the miracle." 

TIB 22h. 
(22a) A miracle rearranges the order of perception, and 
places the levels in their true perspective. 
This heals at all levels, be¬ 
cause all sickness comes from confusing the levels. 


TIB 22i. 
(Tell B. 
about the idea (which is still dim to HS) that the rea¬ 
son is not that you (plural) distantiate, doubt, or cannot believe. 
It is 
more of a reaction formation against a pull which you both recog¬ 
nize is so intense that you are afraid that you will be uprooted. 
But 
remember that a cobweb is really stronger than the iron, if you see it 
properly. 
This fear is also why you couldn't get the point straight.) 
TIB 22j. 
By the way, it is not true that you are both ' JUST SCRIBES' . 

You might remember that the Scribes were very wise and holy men 
and are even sometimes spelled with a capital S. 
If you want to go 
further, you might change the meaning of 'just' from 'merely' to 
'honest', a term used in the Bible in association with 'might' or 
'strength.' Tell B. 
you couldn't make that pun if the original phras¬ 
ing had been singular. 
(HS aside about liking the first about 19 as¬ 
sumption failure more.) Answer: T(8) -8- It was cuter, but this one 
MEANS more. 
The REAL reason you don't like it is because it refers 
to you in a VERY lofty position. 
This makes you nervous.) 

TIB 22k. 
Correction : And don't lose sight of the emphasis on coop¬ 
eration, or the NOT SINGULAR. 
That point about "industrial neces¬ 
sity" should read "corporate", referring to the body of Christ which 
is a way of referring to the Church. 
But the Church of God is only 
the sum of the souls he created, which IS the corporate body of 


18 The “21” here is handwritten in ... 
as in several instances there is confusion and/or re-sequencing as 
to numbering and order of principles. 


19 The words “first about” here are handwritten above “assumption” and aren’t fully legible, so there 
might be something else written there. 
Between paragraphs 23e and 23f in the Notes, what would 
appear from the context to be a first reference to “Assumption failure” occurs. 
The Urtext pages show 
some sequence differences from the Notes here. 
The 23e-f material appears to predate the 22j material 
which appears to refer back to something which precedes it. 
In the current Urtext sequence the 
“preceding” material actually follows it. 
Whether this re-sequencing was intentional or inadvertent is 
not known. 



1-8 


18 






Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


Christ. 
Correct to read: "A Miracle makes souls one in God," and 
leave in the next part about cooperation. 
20 

TIB 221. 
Further correction : "God" should read "Christ." The Father 
and the Son are not identical, but you CAN say "Like Father, LIKE 
Son." 

TIB 22m. 
(Remind B. 
to get another notebook. 
I don't give up as eas¬ 
ily as FFE does. 
If I could get YOU to listen, which was a miracle in 
itself, I can get him to register. 
Fie should appreciate this more than 
anyone else, having had some trouble with this problem himself.) 

TIB 22n. 
" Lord heal me" is the only legitimate prayer . 
This also 
means "Lord atone for me," because the only thing man should pray 
for is forgiveness. 
Fie FFAS everything else. 


TIB 22o. 
Now take this personally, and listen to Divine logic: If, 
when you have been forgiven, you have everything else, and 
If you have been forgiven 
Then you HAVE everything else. 


TIB 22p. 
This happens to be the simplest of all propositions. 


IF P then Q 
P 

Therefore, Q 

TIB 22q. 
The real question is, is P true. 
If you will review the evi¬ 
dence, I think you will find this inescapable. 
I went on very personal 
record to this effect, and I am the only completely True Witness for 
God. 
You have every 21 right to examine MY credentials—in fact, I 
urge you to do so. 
You haven't read the Bible in years. 
T(9) -9- 

T 1 B 22r. 
Special Explanatory Note: As soon as you (H & B) have 
entered the second phase, you will be not only willing to enter into 
communion, but will also understand peace and joy. 
Your commit¬ 
ment is not yet total. 
That is why you still have more to learn than to 
teach. 
When your equilibrium stabilizes, you can teach AS MUCH 

20 Urtext manuscript has the closing quote here at the end of the paraagraph, rather than after “God,”. 


21 Urtext manuscript has “very” but probably this should be “every.” That is what the Notes has. 



19 


1-9 







Volume I Text 


as you learn. 
This will give you the proper sense of balance. 
Mean¬ 
while, remember that NO EFFORT IS WASTED. 
Unless you re¬ 
member this, you cannot avail yourself of MY efforts, which are lim¬ 
itless. 


TIB 22s. 
(Have a good day.) Since only eternity is real, why not use 
the illusion of time constructively? You might remember that "un¬ 
derneath are the Everlasting Arms." 22 

TIB 22t. 
BIBLICAL QUOTATION: "If you are ashamed of me before 
men, I will be ashamed of you before God," 23 (HS ? of misquote.) is 
interpreted as a threat ONLY as long you remain in the first step, 
(see bottom of p. 
6 for steps.) 

TIB 22u. 
What it REALLY means is that if you are ashamed of me 
(or embarrassed by love), you will project and therefore make it im¬ 
possible for me to reach you. 
Make every effort you can NOT to do 
this. 
I will help you as much as you will let me. 


TIB 23a. 
Miracles make time and tide wait for all men. 
They can heal 
the sick and raise the dead because man himself made both death 
and taxes, and can abolish both. 
Note: Tax also means "strain." (One 
definition for miracles is: "That which, or one who, is of surpassing 
excellence or merit.") (from Dictionary, third definition)T(lO) -10- 
T l B 23b. 
YOU are a miracle. 
24 God creates only "that which, or one 
who, is of surpassing excellence or merit." Man is capable of this 
kind of creation, too, being in the image and likeness 25 of his own 
Creator. 
Anything else is only his own nightmare, and does not ex¬ 
ist. 
Only the Creations of Light are real. 



22 Deuteronomy 33:27 The eternal God is thy dwelling place. 
And underneath are the everlasting 
arms: And he thrust out the enemy from before thee, And said, Destroy. 


23 Mark 8:38 “For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful 
generation, the Son of man also shall be ashamed of him, when he cometh in the glory of his Father 
with the holy angels.” Also Luke 9:26 (similar) and Matthew 10:33 (related) 

24 The Notes starts this paragraph with “That’s right that You are a miracle.” The glyph for “that” is 
sometimes indistinguishable from an em dash, so that could be “That’s right - You are a miracle.” In 
the Urtext we seem to have lost a couple of words. 


2:1 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



MO 


20 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 23c. 
Miracles 26 are a part of an interlocking chain of forgiveness 
which, when completed, is the Atonement. 
27 This process works all 
the time and in all dimensions of time. 
(e.g. 
given of HS report re¬ 
write for Esther! Esther had hurt something you loved, by writing a 
report you regarded as very bad. 
You atoned for her by writing one 
in her name that was very good. 
Actually, it was not your responsi¬ 
bility professionally to do this, but because you DO love the Shield 
you recognized that in this case, you ARE your brother's keeper. 

While you did not cancel Esther's sin (later defined as "lack of 
love") you DID cancel out its EFFECTS. 


TIB 23d. 
Someday I want to tell Esther that not only is she forgiven 
but that the effects of all her sins are cancelled. 
This is what I have 
already told you. 
When I can tell her, she will be afraid for a long 
time, because she will remember many things, consciously or un¬ 
consciously, including the Shield report, a lack of love which you 
cancelled out in advance by a miracle of devotion. 


TIB 23e. 
I am in charge of the process of Atonement, which I under¬ 
took to begin. 
My Atonement was for the canceling out of all sins 
(i.e., lack of love) which human beings could not otherwise correct. 

That is what the Biblical statement "underneath are the Everlasting 
Arms" 28 means. 
(HS explanation: This means that He will backstop 
whenever human miracles will not suffice for atonement purposes. 

However, it is perfectly clear that when a person can atone by mira¬ 
cles, both giver and receiver are atoning. 
It is better to atone this 


26 Immediately before this in the Notes we read: “As long as you take accurate notes, every word is 
meaningful. 
But I can’t always get through. 
Whenever possible, I will correct retroactively. 
Be sure to 
note all later corrections. 
They mean that you are more receptive than you were when I tried before.” N 

4:67:6-15 

27 The word “atonement,” coined by the 16 th Century Bible translator William Tyndale, literally means 
AT ONE-MENT. 
It occurs 279 times in ACIM and 71 times in the King James Bible. 
We can’t possi¬ 
bly footnote every Bible reference each time the word appears. 
The frequency of use suggests the im¬ 
portance of the concept. 
It is closely linked to the term “salvation” which is the end, atonement being 
the means. 
Of note is the fact that the term is defined: TIB 23f ‘Note that the word “atone” really 
means “undo.”’ In ACIM’s teaching, we were created “at one” or united with God, prior to the separa¬ 
tion. 
“Atonement” then is an “undoing” of the separation illusion, the result of which is “reunion” with 
God. 


28 Deuteronomy 33:27 The eternal God is thy dwelling place, And underneath are the everlasting 
arms: And he thrust out the enemy from before thee, And said, Destroy. 



21 


Ml 



Volume I Text 


way because of the mutual benefits involved.) T(ll) -ll "Inasmuch as 
you do it unto the least of these, my children" really ends with "you 
do it unto yourself and ME." 29 The reason why YOU come before 
me is because I do not need miracles for my own Atonement, but I 
stand at the end in case YOU fail temporarily. 


TIB 23f. 
SPECIAL EXPLANATION: (In response to HS request re 
possible corrections.) Change the word "sin" to "absence of love." 
Sin is a manmade word with threat connotations which he made up 
himself. 
No REAL threat is involved anywhere. 
Just because "nature 
abhors a vacuum," which is true enough, it does NOT follow that "a 
vacuum is filled with hellfire." Nothing is gained by frightening 
yourself, and it is very destructive. 
Miracles need freedom from fear. 

Part of their Atonement value involves just that. 
Note that the word 
"atone" really means "undo." 30 T(l2) -12 


29 Matthew 25:40 And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye 
did it unto one of these my brethren, even these least, ye did it unto me. 


30 The following paragraphs (below) in the Notes about “Guidance,” asking, and answering, were 
omitted from the Urtext. 
The material is, however, the clearest and most specific material on the 
practical issues, most notably blockages and why it is we sometimes don’t feel we have been heard or 
can hear. 
(N 4:73 through 4:75)) 

The reason I direct everything that is unimportant is because it is no way to waste your free will. 
If you 
insist on doing the trivial your way, you waste too much time and will on it. 
Will cannot be free if it is 
tied up in trivia. 
It never gets out. 


I will tell exactly what to do in connection with everything that doesn’t matter. 
That is not an area 
where choice should be invested. 
There is better use of time. 


You have to remember to ask me to take charge of all minutiae, and it will be taken care of so well and 
so quickly that you cannot bog down in it. 


The only remaining problem is that you will be unwilling to ask because you are afraid not to be bogged 
down. 
Don’t let this hold us back. 
If you will ask, I will arrange these things even if you’re not too 
enthusiastic. 


Prayer can safely be very (N 4:74) specific in little matters. 
If you need a coat, ask me where to find 
one. 
I know your taste well, and I also know where the coat is that you would eventually buy anyway. 


If you don’t like the coat afterwards, that is what would have happened anyway. 
I did not pick out the 
coat for you. 
You said you wanted something warm, inexpensive, and capable of taking rough wear. 
I 
told you you could get a Borgana, but I let you get a better one because the furrier needed you. 


Note, however, that it is better in terms of the criteria you established. 
I could do this because you saw 
the coat more that way than in terms of a particular material. 


You thought of Klein’s yourself a few days ago, and then you decided against it, because Borgana is 
price- fixed. 
Then you remembered a coat Grace once got there that was much cheaper, and seemed (N 
4:75) pretty much the same, and asked yourself whether it was really right to be sold on a particular 
trade name through advertising. 
That opened your mind. 


I cannot save you more time than you will let Me, but if you are willing to try the Higher Shopping 
Service, which also covers all lower-order necessities and even quite a number of whims within reason, 

I have very good use for the time we could save. 



1-12 


22 




Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 23g. 
The purpose of the Atonement is to restore everything TO 
you. 
(That is, to restore the awareness. 
Later clarification.) You had 
everything when you were created, just as everyone did. 
31 

TIB 23h. 
Having been restored to your original state, you naturally 
become part of the Atonement yourself. 
You now share MY inability 
to tolerate the lack of love in yourself & in everyone else, and MUST 
join the GREAT CRUSADE to correct it. 
The slogan for this Crusade 
is "Listen, Learn, and DO ." 

TIB 23i. 
This means Listen to My Voice, Learn to undo the error, 
and DO something to correct it. 


TIB 23 j. 
The first two are not enough. 
The real members of MY 
party are ACTIVE workers. 
T(l3) -13 

TIB 23k. 
The power to work Miracles BELONGS to you. 
I will create 
the right opportunities for you to do them. 
But you must be ready & 
willing to do them, since you are already able to. 
Doing them will 
bring conviction in the ability. 
I repeat that you will see Miracles 
through your hands through MINE. 
32 Conviction really comes 
through accomplishment. 
Remember that ability is the potential. 

Achievement is its expression, and Atonement is the Purpose. 


TIB 24a. 
24 A miracle is a Universal Blessing from God through Me 
to all My Brothers. 
Explanation: You once said that souls cannot rest 
until everyone has found salvation. 
33 This happens to be true. 
It is 


Remember, the specific answer you get depends on the specific question you ask. 
The fewer limits you 
impose, the better the answer you’ll get. 
Ex: You could ask where do I find a Borgana coat? or where is 
the coat I want? or where is the coat I should get? and so on. 
? ? The form of the thought determines 
the level of creation. 


Immediately before this paragraph, on Notes page 4:80 2-6, we find what appears to be a miracle 
principle inadvertently omitted. 
It appears within a segment marked “omitted” and which does contain 
mostly personal material relating to dreams. 
It is as follows: 

Miracles are a way of undoing 
over-learned patterns of love-lack. 


They bring light into darkness. 


That is where their atonement value lies. 


The relevance of these words in the immediate context is obvious. 


j2 This line is actually the first line on the first day of the scribing of Chapter 1 in Schucman’s 
notebooks, and the fifth sentence on the first page of this revision. 
It originally appears slightly 
different, with the last word “MINE” being “ME” instead. 


33 The word “salvation” occurs 760 times in the seven volumes of ACIM and 164 times in the King 
James English Bible. 
We can’t possibly footnote every Bible reference each time the word appears. 



23 


1-13 






Volume I Text 


the privilege of the forgiven to forgive. 
The Disciples were officially 
& specifically told to heal others, as Physicians of the Lord. 
They 
were also told to heal themselves, & were promised that I would 
never leave them or forsake them. 
Atonement is the natural profes¬ 
sion of the Children of God, because they have professed Me. 


TIB 24b. 
(ASIDE . 
Tell B that that is what Professor really means. 
As 
an Assoc. 
Prof., he must become associated with My strength. 
As an 
Asst. 
Prof., you must assist both him and Me. 
The Children need 
both strength & help. 
You cannot help until you are strong. 
The Ev¬ 
erlasting Arms are your strength, and the Wisdom of God is your 
help.) 

TIB 24c. 
"Heaven & Earth shall pass away" 34 means that they will 
not always exist as separate states. 
My Word, which is the Resurrec¬ 
tion and the Light, 35 shall not pass away, because Life is Eternal. 

YOU are the work of God, and His Work is wholly loveable & 
wholly loving. 
This is how a man MUST think of himself in his 
heart, because this is what he IS. 


TIB 24d. 
Add: "As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." 36 T(14) -14 

The Relationship of Miracles and Revelation. 
(Notes 75 
4:102) 

TIB 24e. 
Remember the point about Miracles as a means of organiz¬ 
ing different levels of consciousness. 
Miracles come from the (below 
conscious) (subconscious) level. 
Revelations come from the above 
conscious level. 
The conscious level is in between & reacts to either 


The frequency of its use suggests the importance of the concepts represented by this word. 
Just what 
does “salvation” mean? It is the goal, and atonement is the means. 


34 Mark 13:31 “Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass away.” Also Matthew 
24:25 and Luke 21:33 

35 In the Notes this is “life” and not “Light.” It reflects the Biblical quote: John 11:25 Jesus said to her, 
“I am the resurrection and the life. 
He who believes in Me, though he may die, he shall live.” 

36 I’ve not been able to locate this line in the Notes. 
“As a man thinketh” is the title of a rather famous 
little book by James Allen which might well be what the reference points to. 
While the line sounds like 
a Biblical quote and does reflect what Jesus was teaching in Matthew 5:28, it’s not a word for word 
reference. 
Matthew 5:28: “but I say unto you, that every one that looketh on a woman to lust after her 
hath committed adultery with her already in his heart.” The idea that the thought is causal is central 
here both in the Bible and the Course. 
The most direct Biblical quote is from Proverbs 23:7: “For as 
he thinks in his heart, so is he.” 


1-14 


24 





Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


sub- or super-conscious impulses in varying ratios. 
Freud was right 
about the classification, but not the names. 
He was also right that 
the content of consciousness is fleeting. 
Consciousness is the level 
which engages in the world, and is capable of responding to both 
external & internal impulses. 
Having no impulses from itself, and 
being primarily a mechanism for inducing response, it can be very 
wrong. 


TIB 24f. 
For example, if the identification is with the body, con¬ 
sciousness may distort superconscious impulses by denying their 
Source, & seeking their impact in the orgasm. 
This is the result of 
the "mistaken identity" confusion. 


TIB 24g. 
If you will look back at the description of the EFFECTS of 
Revelation you will see that there ARE some similarities 37 in the ex¬ 
periential results but hardly in the content. 
38 
(This and preceding paragraph go later) 

TIB 24h. 
Revelations induce complete but temporary suspension of 
doubt & fear. 
They represent the original form of communication 
between God and His Souls, before the intrusion of fire and ice 
made this impossible. 
It should be noted that they involve an ex¬ 
tremely personal sense of closeness to Creation, which man tries to 
find in sexual relationships. 
This confusion is responsible for the 
depression and fear which are often associated with sex. 


TIB 24i. 
Sex is often associated with lack of love, but Revelation is 
PURELY a love experience. 
Physical closeness CANNOT achieve 
this. 
As was said before, the subconscious impulses properly induce 
Miracles, which ARE interpersonal, and result in closeness to others. 

This can be misunderstood by a personally willful consciousness as 
an impulse toward sexual gratification. 


TIB 24j. 
The Revelation unites Souls directly with God. 


’ 7 Originally written in the Notes “superficial similarities,” the word “superficial” is crossed out. 


The bold characters are not in the Urtext but are in the Notes and appear to have been omitted 
inadvertently. 



25 


1-15 




Volume I Text 


TIB 24k. 
The Miracle unites Souls directly with each other. 
Neither 
emanates from consciousness, but both are EXPERIENCED there. 

This is essential, because consciousness is the state which 
PRODUCES action, though it DOES NOT Inspire it. 
T(l5) -15 

TIB 241. 
Man is free to believe what he chooses. 
What he DOES at¬ 
tests to what he believes. 


TIB 24m. 
The deeper levels of his subconscious always contain the 
impulse to Miracles, but he is free to fill its superficial levels, which 
are closer to consciousness, with the impulses of this world and to 
identify himself with them. 
This results in denying himself access to 
the miracle level underneath. 
In conscious actions, then, his inter¬ 
personal relationships also become superficial, and miracle-inspired 
relating becomes impossible. 


TIB 25a. 
Miracles are a way of EARNING release from fear. 


TIB 25b. 
Revelation induces a state in which fear has ALREADY 
BEEN abolished. 
Miracles are thus a means, and Revelations are an 
end. 
In this sense, they work together. 


TIB 25c. 
(Tell B. 
that miracles DO NOT depend on Revelation. 
They 
INDUCE it. 
He is quite capable of miracles already, but he is still too 
fearful for Revelations.) 

TIB 25d. 
Note that YOUR (HS) Revelation occurred specifically after 
you had engaged at the visionary level in a process of DENYING 
fear. 


TIB 25e. 
Revelation is intensely personal, and 39 is actually not trans¬ 
latable into conscious content at all. 
That is why any attempt to de¬ 
scribe it in words is usually incomprehensible, even to the writer 
himself at another time. 
This is why the Book of Revelations is es¬ 
sentially incomprehensible. 
Revelation induces ONLY experience. 

Miracles, on the other hand, induce interpersonal ACTION. 
In the 
end, these are more useful, because of their IMPERSONAL nature. 



39 Urtext manuscript has (ampersand) here and in numerous places. 
It is essentially shorthand for 
“and” and we expand it to “and.” 


1-16 


26 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 25f. 
In this phase of learning, working miracles is more valuable 
because freedom from fear cannot be thrust upon you. 
The experi¬ 
ence cannot last. 


TIB 25g. 
(Tell B. 
that your propensity for Revelations, which is very 
great, is the result of a high level of past communion. 
Its transitory 
nature comes from the descent into fear, which has not yet been 
overcome. 
His own "suspended" state mitigates both extremes. 
This 
has been very apparent in the course of both of your recent devel¬ 
opmental patterns.) T(l6) -16 

TIB 25h. 
Miracles are the essential course of ACTION for both of 
you. 
They will strengthen him and stabilize you. 


TIB 25i. 
(NOTE that the much more personal than usual notes you 
are taking today reflect the Revelatory experience. 
This does NOT 
produce the more generalizeable quality which this course is aimed 
at. 
They may, nevertheless, be of great help to B. 
personally, since 
you asked for something that WOULD help him personally. 
It de¬ 
pends on how he listens, and how well he understands the COOP¬ 
ERATIVE nature of your joint experience. 
You can help only by 
reading this note FIRST . 
Ask him later if this should be included in 
the written part of the course at all or whether you should keep 
these notes separately. 
He is in charge of these decisions.) 

TIB 25j. 
(Tell B. 
he should try to understand the VERY important 
difference between Christ-control and Christ-guidance. 
This is what 
made him fearful yesterday.) 

T l B 26. 
Miracles praise God through men. 
They praise God by hon¬ 
oring his Creations, affirming their perfection. 
They heal because 
they deny body-identification and affirm 40 Soul-identification. 
By 
perceiving the Spirit, they adjust the levels and see them in proper 
alignment. 
This places the Spirit at the center, where Souls can 
communicate directly. 


40 Urtext manuscript has “affirms” which presents grammatical problem with agreement in number. 

This may be typing mistake as the Notes has it as “affirm.” 


27 


1-17 





Volume I Text 


TIB 27a. 
Miracles should inspire gratitude, not awe. 
Man should 
thank God for what he really is. 
The Children of God are very holy. 

The miracle honors their holiness. 


TIB 27b. 
God's Creations cannot lose their holiness, although it can 
be hidden. 
The miracle uncovers it, and brings it into the light where 
it belongs. 


TIB 27c. 
Holiness can never be really hidden in darkness, but man 
can deceive himself on this point. 
This illusion makes him fearful, 
because in his heart he KNOWS it is an illusion. 
Like all illusions, he 
exerts enormous efforts to establish their validity. 
The miracle sets 
validity where it belongs. 
Eternal validity belongs only to the Soul. 

The miracle acknowledges only the Truth. 
It thus dispels man's illu¬ 
sions about himself, and puts him into communion with himself and 
with God. 
T(17) -17 

TIB 27d. 
Christ inspires all miracles, which are essentially interces¬ 
sions. 
They intercede for man's holiness, and make him holy. 
They 
place man beyond the physical laws, and raise him into the sphere 
of celestial order. 
In this order, man IS perfect. 


TIB 27e. 
The Soul never loses its communion with God. 
Only the 
mind and body need Atonement. 
The miracle joins in the Atone¬ 
ment of Christ by placing the mind in the service of the Spirit. 
This 
establishes the proper function of mind, and abolishes its errors. 


TIB 28a. 
Miracles honor man, BECAUSE he is loveable. 
They dispel 
illusions about himself, and perceive the light in him. 
They thus 
atone for his errors by freeing him from his own nightmares. 
They 
release him from a prison in which he has imprisoned himself. 
By 
freeing his mind from illusions, they restore his sanity, and place 
him at the feet of Jesus. 


TIB 28b. 
(Biblical quotation re healing of devil possessed man, in 
which the sufferer was subsequently found healed in his right mind, 
and sitting at feet of Jesus. 
41 HS note.) 


41 Mark 5: 1-15 And they came to Jesus and saw him who had been demon-possessed, and had the 
legion, sitting and clothed and right-minded, the one who had the legion. 
And they were afraid. 



1-18 


28 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 28c. 
(Tell B. 
man's mind can be possessed by illusions, but his 
Spirit is eternally free. 
If a mind creates without love, it can create an 
empty shell. 
This CAN be possessed by evil. 
But the Atonement re¬ 
stores the Soul to its proper place. 
Unless there is emptiness there is 
no danger, and emptiness is a false creation. 
The mind that serves 
the Spirit is invulnerable.) 

TIB 29a. 
The miracle restores the Soul to its fullness. 
By atoning for 
lack, it establishes perfect protection. 
The strength of the Soul leaves 
no room for intrusions. 
The forgiven are filled with the Soul, and 
their Soul forgives in return. 
It is the duty of the released to release 
their brothers. 


TIB 29b. 
The forgiven ARE the means of Atonement. 
Those released 
by Christ must join in releasing their brothers, for this is the plan of 
Atonement. 


TIB 30a. 
Miracles are the way in which minds that serve the spirit 

unite with Christ for the salvation (or release) of all God's Creations. 

T(18)-18 

TIB 30b. 
Aside ( HS commented on awakening with the phrase 
"God is not Mocked," 42 with anticipation of punishment.) 

TIB 30c. 
Interpretation : "God is not mocked" was intended as reas¬ 
surance. 
You are afraid that what you wrote last night was contra¬ 
dictory, conflicting with some earlier points, especially because you 
were writing while you were all doped up. 
Remember, "God is not 
mocked" under any circumstances. 


TIB 30d. 
Contradictions in MY word mean lack of understanding, 
or scribal failures, which I make every effort to correct. 
But they are 
still NOT crucial. 
The Bible has the same problem, I assure you, and 
it's STILL being edited. 
Consider the power of MY WORD, in that it 
has withstood all the attacks of error, and is the Source of Truth. 



42 Galatians 6:7 Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also 
reap. 


Job 13:9 Will it be well when He searches you out? Or can you mock Him as one mocks a man? 


29 


1-19 





Volume I Text 


TIB 30e. 
(Tell B. 
that there are certain advantages in being a Psy¬ 
chologist. 
A major one is the understanding of projection, and the 
extent of its results. 
Possession is very closely related to projection. 

"Lucifer" 43 could be literally translated "Light Bearer." 44 He literally 
PROJECTED himself from Heaven. 
Projection still has this "hurling" 
connotation, because it involves hurling something you DO NOT 
want, and regard as dangerous and frightening, to someone else. 

This is the opposite of the Golden Rule, and having placed this rule 
upside down, the reverse of miracles, or projection, follows auto¬ 
matically.) 

TIB 30f. 
The correction lies in accepting what is true in YOURSELF, 
by bringing ALL that you are into light. 
(HS fearful of writing next 
part.) Cacey 45 [sic] was wrong about Possession, and he was also 
wrong about hurting himself. 
One of the major problems with mira¬ 
cle workers is that they are so sure that what they are doing is right, 
because they KNOW it stems from love, that they do not pause to let 
ME establish MY limits. 


TIB 30g. 
While what he (Cacey" 46 [sic]) did came from Me, he could 
NOT be induced to ask me each time whether I wanted him to per¬ 
form this PARTICULAR miracle. 
If he had, he would not have per¬ 
formed any miracles that could not get through constructively, and 
would thus have saved himself unnecessary strain. 
He burned him¬ 
self out with indiscriminate miracles, and to this extent did not ful¬ 
fill his own full purpose, and was also subject to the Scribal error I 
mentioned at the start. 
The Disciples were also prone to this. 
T(l9) -19 
TIB 30h. 
The answer is NEVER perform a miracle without asking 
me IF you should. 
This spares you from exhaustion, and because 
you act under direct communication the trance becomes unneces¬ 
sary. 
Because miracles are expressions of love, it does NOT follow 


4j Isaiah 14:12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down 
to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! 

44 The Strong’s definition, and the translation used in the Revised Version and Good News Version is 
“morning star.” 

45 Almost certainly a reference to Cayce (Edgar) whose name is pronounced KAY-SEE. 


46 see previous footnote. 



1-20 


30 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


that they will always be effective. 
I am the only one who can per¬ 
form miracles indiscriminately, because I AM the Atonement. 
You 
have a ROLE in Atonement, which I will dictate TO you. 


TIB 30i. 
Remember, you already have a point about the involuntary 
nature of miracles. 
We also have established the fact that everything 
involuntary belongs under Christ-control, NOT under yours. 
Under 
Christ-control, Miracles REPLENISH the doer as well as the re¬ 
ceiver. 


TIB 30j. 
Possession really means "Not under Christ-Control", thus 
making him (the mind?) vulnerable to projection. 
The references to 
the earth-bound entering bodies really refer to the "taking over" by 
their own earth-bound "thoughts." This IS Demon Possession. 
After 
all, Lucifer fell, but he was still an angel. 
He is thus the symbol for 
man. 
47 Atonement is the knowledge that the belief that angels can 
fall is false. 
It is true that mind can create projections as well as 
miracles, but it's NOT true that projections are REAL. 
Any psy¬ 
chologist should understand this. 
This is what is meant by "The 
Truth shall set you free." 48 

TIB 30k. 
Christ-controlled miracles are part of the Atonement, but 
Christ-guidance is personal, and leads to PERSONAL salvation. 
The 
impersonal nature of miracles is an essential ingredient, because this 
enables Me to control their distribution as I see fit. 


TIB 301. 
Christ-guidance, on the other hand, leads to the highly 
PERSONAL experience of Revelation. 
This is why it involves PER¬ 
SONAL choice. 
A guide does NOT control, by definition, but he 
does DIRECT, leaving the following up to you. 
"Lead us not into 
temptation" 49 means "guide us out of our own errors." Note that 
the word is "lead", NOT order. 



47 This is a rather intriguing line when you think about it: Lucifer becomes the symbol, not for a 
demonic entity, but for man, specifically man’s “earth-bound thoughts.” 

48 John 8:32 “and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” In relation to the idea of 
Lucifer as a symbol for man, above, “The Truth” that sets you free is the knowledge that “evil” is man¬ 
made, our own “earth-bound thoughts” rather than an external, independent, evil personality. 


49 Matthew 6:13 And bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. 



31 


1-21 




Volume I Text 


TIB 30m. 
"Take up thy cross and follow me" 50 should be interpreted 
to read "Recognize your errors and choose to abandon them by fol¬ 
lowing My guidance."T(20) -20 

TIB 30n. 
(Tell B. 
when he is afraid of Possession, he need only re¬ 
member that error cannot really threaten Truth, which ALWAYS 
can withstand its assaults. 
ONLY the error is really vulnerable.) The 
"Princes of this World" 51 are princes only because they are really 
angels. 
But they are free to establish their kingdom where they see 
fit. 


TIB 30o. 
If you will remember that ALL princes INHERIT their 
power from the Father, the right choice becomes inevitable. 


The soul is in a state of grace forever. 


Man's reality is ONLY his soul. 


Therefore, man is in a state of Grace forever. 


TIB 30p. 
Atonement undoes all errors in this respect, and thus 
uproots the REAL source of fear. 
If you will check back at the 
reference to uprooting, you will understand it better in this 
context. 
52 

TIB 30q. 
(Tell B. 
that WHENEVER God's reassurances are experi¬ 
enced as threat, it is ALWAYS because man is defending his mis¬ 
placed & misdirected love and loyalty. 
That is what projection al¬ 
ways involves.) 

TIB 30 r. 
"Casting spells" merely means "affirming error", and error 
is lack of love. 
When man projects this onto others, he DOES im¬ 
prison them, but only to the extent that he reinforces errors they 
have already made. 
This distortion makes them vulnerable to the 
curse of others, since they have already cursed themselves. 
The 

30 Mark 10:21 “And Jesus looking upon him loved him, and said unto him. 
One thing thou lackest: go, 
sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, [take 
up thy cross, and*] follow me.” *This phrase “take up thy cross” appears only in the 1611 “King 
James” version and not in modem translations which simply state “and follow me.” 

1 I Corinthians 2:6 Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this 
world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to nought: 

52 T 1 B 22i (N 4:89) is the previous reference to being “uprooted” 


1-22 


32 




Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


miracle worker can only bless, and this undoes the curse and frees 
the soul from prison. 


TIB 30s. 
(Tell B. 
that his slip about (rivet) should be noted. 
Some 
slips reach consciousness from the un-Christ-controlled subcon¬ 
scious, and betray a lack of love.)T(2l) -21 

TIB 30t. 
But others (slips) come from the superconscious, which IS 
in communion with God, and which can also break into conscious¬ 
ness. 


TIB 30u. 
HIS slip (rivet) was an expression of a Soul gaining enough 
strength to request freedom from prison. 
It will ultimately DE¬ 
MAND it. 


TIB 30v. 
Special Revelation for HS 

TIB 30w. 
You are wholly lovely. 
A perfect shaft of pure light. 
Before 
your loveliness the stars stand transfixed, and bow to the power of 
your will. 


TIB 30x. 
What do children know of their creation, except what their 
Creator tells them? 

TIB 30y. 
You were created ABOVE the angels because your role in¬ 
volves creation as well as protection. 


TIB 30z. 
You who are in the image of the Father 53 need bow only to 
HIM, before whom I kneel with you. 


TIB 30aa. 
Note : This revelation was permitted because you did NOT 
project onto B. 
the blame for your omission to ASK ME if you 
should transcribe the notes. 
The fact that HE should have done so 
does not exempt you from your own omission. 


TIB 30ab. 
Thanks for blessing him with a miracle rather than curs¬ 
ing him with projection. 


TIB 30ac. 
NOTE FURTHER: HE needn't feel concerned about it ei¬ 
ther; so he forgot? It happens all the time, until the habit of asking 
becomes involuntary. 



53 Genesis 1:27 And God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him: male and 
female created he them. 



33 


1-23 




Volume I Text 


TIB 30ad. 
(HS meeting with Dr. 
Wise and Dr. 
Damrosch. 
Dr. 
D per¬ 
mitted an opportunity for questioning in his capacity as chairman of 
the flu board for asking re B's flu shot. 
This was an example of how 
miracles should work. 
You did not jump into the question yourself, 
and even though you DID rush for the phone on Red's advice, you 
exerted no pressure on B's reluctance. 
)T(22) -22 

TIB 30 ae. 
This gave ME a chance to let you leave it to the real expert, 
whom I sent to answer the question. 


TIB 3la. 
Miracles are examples of right thinking. 
Reality contact at 
all levels becomes strong & accurate, thus permitting correct de¬ 
lineation of intra- and interpersonal boundaries. 
As a result, the 
doer sees the truth as God created it. 
This is what is meant by the 
point on "perspective adjustment ." 54 

T 1 B 32. 
A miracle is a correction factor introduced into false think¬ 
ing by ME. 


TIB 32b. 
It acts as a catalyst, shaking up erroneous perception and 
snapping it into place. 
This correction factor places man under the 
Atonement principle, where his perception is healed. 
Until this has 
occurred, perception of the Divine Order is impossible. 
True depth 
perception becomes possible only at the highest order of perceptual 
integration. 


TIB 32c. 
The Spiritual eye is the mechanism of miracles, because 
what the Spiritual eye perceives IS truth. 
The Spiritual eye perceives 
both the Creations of God AND the creations of man. 
Among the 
creations of man, it can also separate the true from the false by its 
ability to perceive totally rather than selectively. 
It thus becomes the 
proper instrument for reality testing, which always involves the 
necessary distinction between the true and the false. 


TIB 33a. 
The miracle dissolves error because the Spiritual eye identi¬ 
fies error as false or unreal. 
This is the same as saying that by seeing 
light, darkness automatically disappears. 
T(23) -23 

54 See paragraph TIB 22h 


1-24 


34 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 33b. 
Darkness is lack of light. 
It does not have unique 
properties of its own. 
It is an example of the scarcity fallacy, from 
which only error can proceed. 


TIB 33c. 
(Truth is always abundant.Those who perceive and ac¬ 

knowledge that they have everything have no need for driven be¬ 
havior of any kind. 
HS has other personal material related to this re 
pregnancy.) 

T 1 B 34. 
Miracles are a blessing from parents to children. 
This is just 
another way of phrasing the previous point about "from those who 
have more to those who have less." Children do NOT belong to par¬ 
ents, but they DO need to share their greater abundance. 
If they are 
deprived, their perception becomes distorted. 
When this occurs, the 
whole family of God, or the Sonship, is impaired in its relationships. 


TIB 34b. 
Ultimately, every member of the family of God must re¬ 
turn. 
The miracle calls to him to return, because it blesses and hon¬ 
ors him even though he may be absent in spirit. 


TIB 35a. 
The miracle acknowledges all men as your brothers and 
Mine. 
It is a way of perceiving the Universal Mark of God in them. 

TIB 35b. 
(Tell B. 
that this is the true "strawberry mark" of Brother¬ 
hood. 
This is just a sign of special concern for him, because he keeps 
worrying about this.) 

TIB 35c. 
You might add that his false idea about his own exclusion 
from Universal Love is fallacious in your terms, and arrogant in his. 

HIS real specialness does NOT stem from exclusion, but from inclu¬ 
sion. 
ALL My Brothers are special. 
He should stop interpreting this 
as "all except B." This is ridiculous! T(24) -24 

TIB 35d. 
Tell him that the implied lack of love that his version con¬ 
tains is WAY off the Mark, and misses the level of right thinking en¬ 
tirely. 
He MUST heal his perception in this respect. 
He MUST work 
a miracle on behalf of himself here 55 (See the point about miracles as 

55 Urtext manuscript has a period here, apparently a typo. 



35 


1-25 




Volume I Text 


a perception corrector) before he can effect miracles as creative en¬ 
ergizers, which they are. 


TIB 35e. 
(Tell B. 
that 50,000,000 Frenchmen CAN be wrong, because 
the notion is too fragmented. 
What CAN'T be wrong is the Univer¬ 
sal Sonship of which he is a part.) 

TIB 35f. 
God WOULD be mocked if ANY of his creations lacked 
holiness. 
The Creation IS whole. 
The mark of Wholeness is Holiness, 
not holes. 
THE SONSHIP HAS NO HOLES ANYWHERE . 


TIB 36a. 
Wholeness is the perceptual content of the miracle. 
It thus 
corrects (or atones for) the faulty perception of lack. 


TIB 36b. 
We now turn to the fundamental distinction between mira¬ 
cles and projection. 
The stimulus MUST precede the response, and 
must also (determine) (influence) the kind of response that is 
evoked. 
The relationships of S and R are EXTREMELY intimate. 


(The behavioristic terminology is because this part deals with be¬ 
havior.) 

TIB 36c. 
Behavior IS response, so that the question "response to 
what?" becomes crucial. 


TIB 36d. 
Stimuli of all kinds are identified through 56 perception. 


You perceive the stimulus and behave accordingly. 
It follows, then, 
that: 

As ye perceive 

So will ye behave T(25) -25 

TIB 36e. 
(HS raises point that Biblical language is hardly behavioris¬ 
tic terminology. 
Answer: No, but they needn't be OUT of accord 
with each other, either.) 

TIB 36f. 
Consider the Golden Rule again. 
You are asked to behave 
toward others as you would have them behave toward you. 
57 This 
means that the perception of both must be accurate, since the 

56 Urtext manuscript has it typed “thru” 

57 Matthew 7:12 “All things therefore whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do 
ye also unto them: for this is the law and the prophets.” 


1-26 


36 





Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


Golden Rule is the Order for appropriate behavior. 
You can't behave 
appropriately unless you perceive accurately, because appropriate 
behavior DEPENDS on lack of level confusion. 
The presence of level 
confusion ALWAYS results in variable reality testing, and hence 
variability in behavioral appropriateness. 


TIB 36g. 
All forms of self image debasement are FUNDAMENTAL 
perceptual distortions. 
They inevitably produce either self-contempt 
or projection, and usually both. 


TIB 36h. 
Since you and your neighbor are equal members of the 
same family, as you perceive both, so will you behave toward both. 

The way to perceive for Golden Rule behavior is to look out from 
the perception of your own holiness and perceive the holiness of 
others. 
T(26) -26 

TIB 36i. 
B. 
& you need considerable clarification of the channel role. 

Look carefully at Mrs. 
Albert. 
She is working miracles every day, 
because she knows who she is. 
I emphasize again that your 
tendency to forget names is not hostility, but a fear of involvement 
or RECOGNITION. 
You had misinterpreted human encounters as 
opportunities for magic rather than for miracles and so you tried to 
PROTECT THE NAME. 
This is a very ancient & primitive way of 
trying to protect a person. 


TIB 36j. 
NOTE The very old Jewish practice of changing the name 
of a person who is very ill, so that when the list is given to the Angel 
of Death, the person with that name will not be found. 


TIB 36k. 
This is a good example of the curiously literal regression 
which can occur in very bright people when they become afraid. 


You & B. 
both do it. 
Actually, it is a device closely related to the 
phobia, in the sense that they both narrow fear to a simple aspect of 
a much larger problem in order to enable them to avoid it. 


TIB 361. 
A similar mechanism works when you get furious about a 
comparatively minor expression by someone to whom you are am¬ 
bivalent. 
A good example of this is your response to Jonathan, who 
DOES leave things around in very strange ways. 
Actually, he does 


37 


1-27 



Volume I Text 


this because he thinks that by minor areas of disorganization he can 
protect his stability. 
I remind you that you have done this yourself 
for years, and should understand it very well. 
This should be met 
with great charity, rather than with great fury. 
T(27) -27 

TIB 36m. 
The fury comes from your awareness that you do not love 
Jonathan as you should, and you narrow your lack of love by center¬ 
ing your hate on trivial behavior in an attempt to protect him from 
it. 
58 You also call him Jonathan for the same reason (see previous 
reference). 


TIB 36n. 
Note that a name is a human symbol that "stands for" a 
person. 
Superstitions about names are very common for just that 
reason. 
That is also why people sometimes respond with anger 
when their names are spelled or pronounced incorrectly. 


TIB 36o. 
Actually, the Jewish superstition about changing the names 
was a distortion of a revelation about how to alter or avert death. 

What the revelation's proper content was that those "who change 
their mind" (not name) about destruction (or hate) do not need to 
die. 
Death is a human affirmation of a belief in hate. 
59 That is why 
the Bible says "There is no death," 60 and that is why I demonstrated 
that death does not exist. 
Remember that I came to FULFILL the law 
by 61 RE-INTERPRETING 62 it. 
The law itself, if properly understood, 
offers only protection to man. 
Those who have not yet "changed 
their minds" have entered the "hellfire" concept into it. 


TIB 36p. 
Remember, I said before that because "nature abhors a 
vacuum", it does NOT follow that the vacuum is filled with hell fire. 

The emptiness engendered by fear should be replaced by love, be- 

58 Urtext manuscript omits “an”, handwritten mark-up fills it in. 
It is present in the Notes. 


59 Urtext manuscript has h and f overtyped, so it could be “hate” or “fate” but the “f ’ is the clearer. 


HLC has “fate.” The Notes however, clearly has “hate” so that is what we’re going with. 


60 Revelation 21:4 But has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel. 


2 Timothy 1:10 And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes; there shall be no more death, nor 
sorrow, nor crying. 
There shall be no more pain, for the former things have passed away.” 

61 Urtext manuscript omits “by”, handwritten mark-up fills it in. 
The Notes clearly includes the word 
“by.” 

62 Matthew 5:17 “Do not think that I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets. 
I did not come to 
destroy but to fulfill.” 


1-28 


38 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


cause love and its absence are in the same dimension, and correction 
cannot be undertaken except WITHIN a dimension. 
Otherwise, 
there has been a confusion of levels. 
T(28) -28 

TIB 36q. 
Returning to Mrs. 
Albert (not Andrews), she corrected 
your error about her name without embarrassment and without 
hostility, because she has NOT made your own mistake about 
names. 


TIB 36r. 
She is not afraid, because 63 she knows she is protected. 
She 
made the correction ONLY because you were inaccurate, and the 
whole question of embarrassment did not occur to her. 


TIB 36s. 
She was also quite unembarrassed when she told you that 
everything has to be done to preserve life, because you never can 
tell when God may come and say "Get up, Dave," and then he will. 


TIB 36t. 
She did not ask what YOU believed first, and afterwards 
merely added "and it's true, too." The RIGHT answer to the SCT 
item is: WHEN THEY TOLD ME WHAT TO DO. 
I "referred the 
question to the only REAL authority." 

TIB 36u. 
(HS note: If you ask somebody what he believes before you 
tell him what you believe, then you are implying that you will say 
what he approves. 
This is not "the real authority.") 

TIB 36v. 
You took a lot of notes on "Those who are ashamed of Me 
before men, them will I be ashamed of before God." 64 This was 
rather carefully clarified, even though the quotation is not quite 
right, but it doesn't matter. 


TIB 36w. 
The important thing is that elsewhere in the Bible it also 
says "Those who represent (or plead for) Me to men will be repre¬ 
sented (or pleaded for) BY Me before God." 65 (Note: This quotation 
is also not the correct Biblical phrasing, but it IS what it means.) 


63 Urtext manuscript has it typed “bee.” This is a common abbreviation used in Schucman’s shorthand 
for “because.” 

64 Matthew 10:33 But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father 
which is in heaven. 
Also Mark 8:38 and Luke 9:2. 


65 Matthew 10:32 Every one therefore who shall confess me before men, him will I also confess before 
my Father which is in heaven. 



39 


1-29 





Volume I Text 


Note that one who represents also "witnesses for." The quotation 
thus means that you represent or "witness for" the authority in 
whom you believe. 
T(29) -29 

TIB 36x. 
Your witnessing DEMONSTRATES your belief, and thus 
strengthens it. 


TIB 36y. 
I assure you that I will "witness for" anyone who lets me, 
and to whatever extent he himself permits it. 


TIB 36z. 
Those who witness 66 for me are expressing, through their 
miracles, that they have abandoned deprivation in favor of the 
abundance they have learned BELONGS to them. 


TIB 37a. 
A MAJOR contribution of miracles is their strength in re¬ 
leasing man from his misplaced sense of isolation, deprivation, and 
lack. 
They are affirmations of Sonship, which is a state of completion 
and abundance . 
67 

TIB 37b. 
B's very proper emphasis on "changing your mind" needs 
clarification. 


TIB 37c. 
Whatever is true & real is eternal, & CANNOT change or 
be changed. 
The Soul is therefore unalterable because it is AL¬ 
READY perfect, but the mind can elect the level it chooses to serve. 

The only limit which is put on its choice is that it CANNOT serve 
two masters . 
68 


66 Isaiah 43:10 “You are My witnesses,” says the LORD, 

“And My servant whom I have chosen, 

That you may know and believe Me, 

And understand that I am He. 


Before Me there was no God formed, 

Nor shall there be after Me.” 

Isaiah 43:12 “I have declared and saved, 

I have proclaimed, 

And there was no foreign god among you; 

Therefore you are My witnesses,” 

Says the LORD, “that I am God. 


Acts 1:8 But you shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you; and you shall be 
witnesses to Me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth. 


67 This is miracle principle 43 in the HLC. 


68 Luke 16:13 “No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or 
else he will hold to one, and despise the other. 
Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” 


1-30 


40 




Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 37d. 
While the ballot itself is a secret one, and the right to vote 
is fully protected, voting ALWAYS entails both election AND rejec¬ 
tion. 
If two candidates are voted for, for the same position, the ma¬ 
chine cancels the ballot automatically. 


TIB 37e. 
This is necessary, because a split vote does not represent 
ANY REAL allegiance. 
T(30) -30 

TIB 37f. 
Free will is the attribute of the mind, NOT the Soul. 
The 
Soul always remains changeless, because it never leaves the sight of 
God. 


TIB 37g. 
The Creation of the Soul is already fully accomplished. 
The 
mind, if it votes to do so, becomes a medium by which the Soul can 
create along the line of its own creation. 
If it does not freely elect to 
do so, it retains this creative ability, but places itself under tyran¬ 
nous rather than authoritative control. 
As a result, what it creates is 
imprisonment, because such are the dictates of tyrants. 


TIB 37h. 
To "change your mind" means to place it at the disposal of 
True authority. 
The miracle is thus a sign that the mind has elected 
to be guided by Christ in HIS service. 
The abundance of Christ 69 is 
the natural result of choosing to follow him. 


TIB 37i. 
P.S . 
The reason you have been late recently (for work) be¬ 
cause you were taking dictation is merely because you didn't re¬ 
member to ask me when to stop. 
This is an example of the "indis¬ 
criminate or uncontrolled" miracle-working we already spoke of. 
It 
is well-meant but ill-advised. 


TIB 37j. 
I prompted that call from Jack (taxi man - couldn't pick HS 
up, etc.) to show you that this is not necessary. 
Also, the other man 
needed the money more today. 


TIB 37k. 
NOTE that you managed to fill your scribal role with no 
interruptions, and were also on time. 


TIB 371. 
NOTE also that you closed the book & put it aside WITH¬ 
OUT consulting me. 
ASK "Is that all?" ANSWER : No: add the fol- 

m Matthew 4:19 Then He said to them, "Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men.” 


41 


1-31 







Volume I Text 


lowing: These notes are serving, among other things, to replace the 
"handwriting on the wall" which you once saw next to your own 
altar, which read "You have been 70 weighed in the balance and 
found wanting."T(31) -31 

TIB 37m. 
Scribes MUST learn Christ-control, to replace their former 
habits, which DID produce scarcity rather than abundance. 
From 
errors of this kind, the sense of deprivation IS inevitable, but very 
easily corrected. 


TIB 37n. 
The following is in relation to question about sex. 
Tell B. 

"the one more river" is related to sex. 
You might even explain it to 
him as a "tidal wave", a term which he will understand. 
YOU won't. 

TIB 37o. 
Both of you are involved with unconscious distortions 
(above the miracle level), which are producing a dense cover over 
miracle-impulses which makes it hard for them to reach conscious¬ 
ness. 
Sex & miracles are both WAYS OF RELATING. 
The nature of 
any interpersonal relationship is limited or defined by what you 
want it to DO which is WFFY you want it in the first place. 
Relating 
is a way of achieving an outcome. 


TIB 37p. 
Indiscriminate sexual impulses resemble indiscriminate 
miracle impulses in that both result in body image misperceptions. 

The first is an expression of an indiscriminate attempt to reach 
communion through the body. 
This involves not only the improper 
self identification, but also disrespect for the individuality of others. 

Self-control is NOT the whole answer to this problem, though I am 
by no means discouraging its use. 
It must be understood, however, 
that the underlying mechanism must be uprooted (a word you both 
should understand well enough by now not to regard it as frighten¬ 
ing). 
T(32) -32 

TIB 37q. 
ALL shallow roots 71 have to be uprooted, because they are 
not deep enough to sustain you. 
The illusion that shallow roots can 


70 Urtext manuscript omits “been”, which is handwritten in. 
The Notes clearly has the word present. 


71 Luke 8:13 “But the ones on the rock are those who, when they hear, receive the word with joy; and 
these have no root, who believe for a while and in time of temptation fall away.” 


1-32 


42 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


be deepened and thus made to hold is one of the corollaries on 
which the reversal of the Golden Rule / 2 referred to twice before, is 
balanced. 
As these false underpinnings are uprooted (or given up), 
equilibrium is experienced as unstable. 
But the fact is that NOTH¬ 
ING is less stable than an orientation which is upside down. 
Any¬ 
thing that holds it this way is hardly conducive to greater stability. 

TIB 37r. 
The whole danger of defenses lies in their propensity to 
hold misperceptions rigidly in place. 
This is why rigidity is re¬ 
garded AS stability by those who are off the mark. 


TIB 37s. 
NOTE The only final solution - (no, Helen, this has nothing 
to do with the Nazi use of the term.) You just got frightened again. 

One of the more horrible examples of inverted or upside down 
thinking (and history is full of horrible examples of this) is the fact 
that the Nazis spelled their appalling error with capital letters. 
I 
shed many tears over this, but it is by no means the only time I said 
"Father, forgive them for they know not what they do." 

TIB 37t. 
All actions which stem from reverse thinking are literally 
the behavioral expressions of those who know not what they do . 
73 
Actually, Jean Dixon was right in her emphasis on "Feet on the 
ground & fingertips in the Heaven," though she was a bit too literal 
for your kind of understanding. 
Many people knew exactly what 
she meant, so her statement was the right miracle for them. 
T(33) -33 
TIB 37u. 
For you and Bill, it would be better to consider the concept 
in terms of reliability & validity. 
A rigid orientation can be ex¬ 
tremely reliable, even if it IS upside down. 
In fact, the more consis¬ 
tently upside down it is, the more reliable it is, because consistency 
always held up better mathematically than test-re-test comparisons, 
which were ALWAYS on shaky ground. 
You can check this against 
Jack's notes if you wish, but I assure you its true. 
Split-half reliabil¬ 
ity is statistically a MUCH stronger approach. 
The reason for this is 


72 Matthew 7:12 “Therefore, whatever you want men to do to you, do also to them, for this is the Law 
and the Prophets.” 

73 Luke 23:34 Then Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.” And they 
divided His garments and cast lots. 



43 


1-33 




Volume I Text 


that correlation which is the technique applied to test-re-test com¬ 
parisons, measures only the EXTENT OF association, and does not 
consider the Direction at all. 


TIB 37v. 
But two halves of the same thing MUST go in the same di¬ 
rection, if there is to be accuracy of measurement. 
This simple state¬ 
ment is really the principle on which split half reliability, a means of 
estimating INTERNAL consistency, rests. 


TIB 37w. 
Note, however, that both approaches leave out a very im¬ 
portant dimension. 
Internal consistency criteria disregard time, be¬ 
cause the focus is on one-time measurements. 
Test-retest compari¬ 
sons are BASED on time intervals, but they disregard direction. 


TIB 37x. 
It is possible, of course, to use both, by establishing internal 
consistency AND stability over time. 
You will remember that Jack 
once told his class that the more sophisticated statisticians are con¬ 
centrating more and more on reliability, rather than validity. 
The 
rationale for this, as he said, was that a reliable instrument DOES 
measure something. 
He also said, however, that validity is still the 
ultimate goal, which reliability can only serve. 
T(34) -34 

TIB 37y. 
I submit (I'm using Jack's language in this section, because 
it always had a special meaning for you. 
So did Jack.) Your confu¬ 
sion of sex and statistics is an interesting example of this whole is¬ 
sue. 
Note that night you spent in the scent of roses doing a complex 
factorial analysis of covariance. 
It's a funny story to others, because 
they see a different kind of level confusion than the one you yourself 
were making. 
You might recall that YOU wanted that design, and 
Jack opposed it. 
One of the real reasons why that evening was so 
exhilarating was because it represented a "battle of intellects", (both 
good ones, by the way), each communicating exceptionally clearly 
but on opposite sides. 
The sexual aspects were naturally touched off 
in both of you, because of the sex and aggression confusion. 



1-34 


44 


Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 37z. 
(It is especially interesting that after the battle ended on a 
note of compromise 74 with your agreeing with Jack, he wrote in the 
margin of your notes "virtue is triumphant." (HS note re submis¬ 
sion-dominance, feminine-masculine roles, entered into this.) While 
this (remark) was funny to both of you at the time, you might con¬ 
sider its truer side. 
The virtue lay in the complete respect each of 
you offered to the other's intellect. 
Your mutual sexual attraction 
was also shared. 
The error lay in the word "triumphant." This had 
the "battle" connotation, because neither of you was respecting ALL 
of the other. 
There is a great deal more to a person than intellect & 
genitals. 
The omission was the Soul.)T(35) -35 

TIB 37aa. 
I submit (after a long interruption) that if a mind (Soul) is 
in valid relationship with God, it CAN'T be upside down. 
Jack & the 
other very eminent methodologists have abandoned validity in fa¬ 
vor of reliability because they have lost sight of the end and are con¬ 
centrating on the means. 


TIB 37ab. 
Remember the story about the artist who kept devoting 
himself to inventing better & better ways of sharpening pencils. 
He 
never created anything, but he had the sharpest pencil in town. 
(The 
language here is intentional. 
Sex is often utilized on behalf of very 
similar errors. 
Hostility, triumph, vengeance, self-debasement, and 
all sort of expressions of the lack of love are often VERY clearly seen 
in the accompanying fantasies. 
But it is a PROFOUND error to 
imagine that, because these fantasies are so frequent (or occur so re¬ 
liably), that this implies validity. 
Remember that while validity im¬ 
plies reliability the relationship is NOT reversible. 
You can be 
wholly reliable, and ENTIRELY wrong. 


TIB 37ac. 
While a reliable test DOES measure something, what USE 
is the test unless you discover what the "something" is? And if va¬ 
lidity is more important than reliability, and is also necessarily im- 


74 The words “on a note of compromise” are crossed out. 
In the Notes they are present and even 
underlined for emphasis. 



45 


1-35 



Volume I Text 


plied BY it, why not concentrate on VALIDITY and let reliability fall 
naturally into place. 


TIB 37ad. 
Intellect may be a "displacement upward", but sex can be 
a "displacement outward." How can man "come close" to others 
through the parts of him which are really invisible? The word "in¬ 
visible" means "cannot be seen or perceived." T(36) -36 What cannot 
be perceived is hardly the right means for improving perception. 


TIB 37ae. 
The confusion of miracle impulse with sexual impulse is a 
major source of perceptual distortion, because it INDUCES rather 
than straightening out the basic level-confusion which underlies all 
those who seek happiness with the instruments of the world. 
A de¬ 
sert is a desert is a desert. 
You can do anything you want in it, but 
you CANNOT change it from what it IS. 
It still lacks water, which is 
why it IS a desert (Bring up that dream about the Bluebird. 
While 
HS was looking for this dream, she came across another. 
The mes¬ 
sage was to bring both, as an excellent example of how extremely 
good HS had become over the intervening 25 years at sharpening 
pencils. 
Note that the essential content hasn't changed; it's just bet¬ 
ter written.) The thing to do with a desert is to LEAVE. 


T l B 38. 
Miracles arise from a miraculous state of mind. 
By being 
One, this state of mind goes out to ANYONE, even without the 
awareness of the miracle worker himself. 
The impersonal nature of 
miracles is because Atonement itself is one, uniting all creations 
with their Creator. 


TIB 39a. 
The miracle is an expression of an inner awareness of 
Christ & acceptance of his Atonement. 
The mind is then in a state of 
Grace, and naturally becomes gracious, both to the Host within and 
the stranger without. 
By bringing in the stranger, he becomes your 
brother. 
75 T(37)-37 

TIB 39b. 
The miracles you are told NOT to perform have not lost 
their value. 
They are still expressions of your own state of Grace, but 

73 Matthew 25:35 For I was hungry and you gave Me food; I was thirsty and you gave Me drink; I was 
a stranger and you took Me in; 


1-36 


46 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


the ACTION aspect of the miracle should be Christ-controlled, be¬ 
cause of His complete Awareness of the Whole Plan. 
The imper¬ 
sonal nature of miracle-mindedness ensures YOUR own Grace, but 
only Christ is in a position to know where Grace can be BE¬ 
STOWED. 


TIB 40a. 
A miracle is never lost. 
It touches many people you may 
not even know, and sometimes produces undreamed of changes in 
forces of which you are not even aware. 
This is not your concern. 
It 
will also always bless YOU. 
This is not your concern, either. 
But it IS 
the concern of the Record. 
The Record is completely unconcerned 
with reliability, being perfectly valid because of the way it was set 
up. 
It ALWAYS measures what it was supposed to measure. 


TIB 40b. 
I want to finish the instructions about sex, because this is 
an area the miracle worker MUST understand. 


TIB 40c. 
Inappropriate sex drives (or misdirected miracle-impulses) 
result in guilt if expressed, and depression if denied. 
We said before 
that ALL real pleasure comes from doing God's will . 
76 Whenever it 
is NOT done an experience of lack results. 
This is because NOT do¬ 
ing the will of God IS a lack of self. 


TIB 40d. 
Sex was intended as an instrument for physical creation to 
enable Souls to embark on new chapters in their experience, and 
thus improve their record. 
The pencil was NOT an end in itself. 
(See 
earlier section.) It was an aid to the artist in his own creative 
endeavors. 
T(38) -38 As he made new homes for Souls and guided 
them through the period of their own developmental readiness, he 
learned the role of the father himself. 
The whole process was set up 
as a learning experience in gaining Grace. 


TIB 40e. 
The pleasure which is derived from sex AS SUCH is reli¬ 
able only because it stems from an error which men shared. 

AWARENESS of the error produces the guilt. 
DENIAL of the error 
results in projection. 
CORRECTION of the error brings release. 



76 Ephesians 2:8 For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the 
gift of God. 



47 


1-37 



Volume I Text 


TIB 40f. 
The only VALID use of sex is procreation. 
It is NOT truly 
pleasurable in itself. 
"Lead us not into Temptation" means "Do not 
let us deceive ourselves into believing that we can relate in peace to 
God or our brothers with ANYTHING external."T(39) -39 

TIB 40g. 
The "sin of onan " 77 was called a "sin" because it involved a 
related type of self-delusion; namely, that pleasure WITHOUT relat¬ 
ing can exist. 


TIB 40h. 
To repeat an earlier instruction, the concept of either the 
self or another as a "sex-OBJECT" epitomizes this strange reversal. 

As B. 
put it, and very correctly, too, it IS objectionable, but only be¬ 
cause it is invalid. 
Upside down logic produces this kind of think¬ 
ing. 


TIB 40i. 
Child of God, you were created to create the good, the 
beautiful, and the holy. 
Do not lose sight of this. 
You were right in 
telling B. 
to invite Me to enter anywhere temptation arises. 
I will 
change the situation from one of inappropriate sexual attraction to 
one of impersonal miracle-working. 
The concept of changing the 
channel for libidinal expression is Freud's greatest contribution, ex¬ 
cept that he did not understand what "channel" really means. 


TIB 40j. 
The love of God, for a little while, must still be expressed 
through one body to another. 
That is because the real vision is still 
so dim. 
Everyone can use his body best by enlarging man's 
perception, so he can see the real VISION. 
THIS VISION is invisible 
to the physical eye. 
The ultimate purpose of the body is to render 
itself unnecessary. 
Learning to do this is the only real reason for its 
creation. 


TIB 40k. 
NOTE Scribes have a particular role in the Plan of Atone¬ 
ment, because they have the ability to EXPERIENCE revelations 


77 Genesis 38:8-11 And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother’s wife, and perform the duty of a 
husband’s brother unto her, and raise up seed to thy brother. 
And Onan knew that the seed would not 
be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother’s wife, that he spilled it on the ground, lest 
he should give seed to his brother. 
And the thing which he did was evil in the sight of Jehovah: and he 
slew him also. 
Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter-in-law, Remain a widow in thy father’s house, 
till Shelah my son be grown up; for he said, Lest he also die, like his brethren. 
And Tamar went and 
dwelt in her father’s house. 



1-38 


48 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


themselves, and also to put into words enough of the experience to 
serve as a basis for miracles. 
T(40) -40 

TIB 401. 
(This refers to experiences at the visionary level, after which 
HS wrote "If you will tell me what to do, I will to do it." She had not 
known that the word "to" was inserted, and had merely intended to 
write "I will do it." This recognition had a terrific impact on HS.) 

TIB 40m. 
This is why you EXPERIENCED that revelation about "I 
will to do" VERY personally, but also WROTE IT: What you wrote 
CAN be useful to miracle workers other than yourself. 
We said be¬ 
fore that prayer is the medium of miracles. 
The miracle prayer IS 
what you wrote, i.e. 
"If you will tell me what to do, I will to do it." * 
TIB 40n. 
This prayer is the door that leads out of the desert forever. 


TIB 40o. 
^(Correction next day. 
This is not a complete statement, 
because it does not exclude the negative. 
We have already told you 
to add "and NOT to do what you would not have me do." in con¬ 
nection with miracles. 
The distinction has also been made here be¬ 
tween "miracle-mindedness" as a STATE, and "miracle-doing" as its 
expression. 


TIB 40p. 
The former needs YOUR careful protection, because it is a 
state of miracle-READINESS. 
This is what the Bible means in the 
many references to "Hold yourself ready" and other similar injunc¬ 
tions. 


TIB 40q. 
Readiness here means keep your perception right side up, 
(or valid), so you will ALWAYS be ready, willing, and able. 
These 
are the essentials for "listen, learn, and do." You must be 
READY to listen 
WILLING to learn 
and ABLE to do 

TIB 40 r. 
Only the last is involuntary, because it is the APPLICA¬ 
TION of miracles which must be Christ-controlled. 
But the other 
two, which are the voluntary aspects of miracle-mindedness, ARE 
up to you. 
T(41) -41 


49 


1-39 


Volume I Text 


TIB 40s. 
To channelize DOES have a "narrowing down" connota¬ 
tion, though NOT in the sense of lack. 
The underlying state of mind, 
or Grace is a total commitment. 
Only the DOING aspect involves 
the channel at all. 
This is because doing is always specific. 


TIB 40t. 
As Jack said, "A reliable instrument must measure some¬ 
thing," but a channel is also valid. 
It must learn to do ONLY what it 
is supposed to do. 
Change the prayer to read: 

If you will tell me what to do, 

ONLY THAT I will to do. 


TIB 40u. 
NOTE HS objects to doggerel sound of this, and regards it 
as very inferior poetry. 
ANSWER : It's hard to forget, though. 


TIB 40v. 
The Revelation is literally unspeakable, because it is an ex¬ 
perience of unspeakable love. 
The word "Awe" should be reserved 
only for revelations, to which it is perfectly and correctly applicable. 

It is NOT appropriately applied to miracles, because a state of true 
awe is worshipful. 
It implies that one of a lesser order stands before 
the Greater One. 
This is the case only when a Soul stands before his 
Creator. 
Souls are perfect creations, and should be struck with awe 
in the presence of the Creator of Perfection. 


TIB 40w. 
The miracle, on the other hand, is a sign of love among 
equals. 
Equals cannot be in awe of each other, because awe AL¬ 
WAYS implies inequality. 
Awe is not properly experienced even to 
me. 
That is why in that short introductory vision, I knelt beside you, 
FACING the light. 


TIB 40x. 
An Elder Brother is entitled to respect for his greater ex¬ 
perience, and a reasonable amount of obedience for his greater wis¬ 
dom. 
He is also entitled to love, because he is a brother, and also to 
devotion, if he is devoted. 
It is only my own devotion that entitles 
me to yours. 
But you will notice that I have knelt at your altar as 
readily as I would ever have you kneel at mine. 
T(42) -42 


1-40 


50 




Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 40y. 
There is nothing about me that you cannot attain . 
78 1 have 
nothing that does not come from God. 
The main difference between 
us as yet is that I have NOTHING ELSE. 
This leaves me in a state of 
true holiness, which is only a POTENTIAL in you. 


TIB 40z. 
"No man cometh to the Father but by me " 79 is among the 
most misunderstood statements in the Bible. 
It DOES NOT mean 
that I am in any way separate (or different) from you, EXCEPT IN 
TIME. 
Now, we know that time does not exist. 
Actually, the state¬ 
ment is much more meaningful if it is considered on a vertical rather 
than a horizontal axis. 
Regarded along the vertical, man stands be¬ 
low me, and I stand below God. 
In the process of "rising up", I AM 
higher. 
This is because without me the distance between God and 
man is too great for man to encompass. 
I bridge the distance as an 
Elder Brother 80 to man, on the one hand, and a Son of God on the 
other. 
My devotion to my brothers has placed me in charge of the 
Sonship, which I can render complete only to the extent I can 
SHARE it. 


TIB 40aa. 
This appears to contradict another statement: "I and my 
Father are one ." 81 It doesn't. 
There are still separate parts in the 
statement, in recognition of the fact that the Father is GREATER. 

Actually, the original statement was "are of one KIND." 

TIB 40ab. 
The Holy Spirit is the Bringer of Revelations, not miracles. 

Revelations are INDIRECTLY inspired by me, because I am close to 
the Holy Spirit, and alert to revelation-readiness in my brothers. 


T(43) -431 can thus BRING DOWN to them more than they can 
DRAW down to themselves. 
Jean Dixon's description is perhaps a 
better statement of my position. 
Because my feet are on the ground 


78 John 14:12 “Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do 
also; and greater works than these shall he do; because I go unto the Father.” 

79 John 14:6 Jesus saith unto him, “I am the way, and the truth, and the life: no one cometh unto the 
Father, but by me.” 

80 Romans 8:29 For whom He foreknew, He also predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son, 
that He might be the firstborn among many brethren. 


81 John 10:30 “I and the Father are one.” 


51 


1-41 



Volume I Text 


and my hands are in heaven, I can bring down the glories of Heaven 
to my brothers on earth. 


TIB 40ac. 
The Holy Spirit is the Highest Communication Medium. 

Miracles do not involve this type of communication, because they 
are TEMPORARY communicative devices. 
When man can return to 
his original form of communication with God by direct REVELA¬ 
TION, the need for miracles is over. 
The Holy Spirit mediates higher 
to lower order communication, keeping the direct channel from God 
to man open for revelation. 
Revelation is NOT reciprocal. 
It is al¬ 
ways FROM God TO man. 
This is because God and man are NOT 
equal. 
The miracle is reciprocal because it ALWAYS involves equal¬ 
ity. 


TIB 40ad. 
In the longitudinal (or horizontal) plane, the true equality 
of all men in the Sonship appears to involve almost endless time. 


But we know that time is only an artifact introduced as a learning 
aid. 


TIB 4la. 
The miracle is a learning device which lessens the need for 
time. 
The sudden shift 82 from horizontal to vertical perception 
which the miracle entails introduces an interval from which the doer 
and the receiver both emerge much farther along in time than they 
would otherwise have been. 


TIB 41b. 
A miracle has thus the unique property of abolishing time 
by rendering the space of time it occupies unnecessary. 
There is NO 
relation between the time a miracle TAKES and the time it COVERS. 

It substitutes FOR learning that might have taken thousands of 
years. 
It does this by the underlying recognition of perfect equality 
and holiness between doer and receiver on which the miracle rests. 

T(44) -44 It is unstable, but perfectly consistent, i.e., it does not occur 
predictably across time, and it rarely occurs in comparable forms. 

But within ITSELF it is perfectly consistent. 
Since it contains NOTH- 

82 The manuscript has the plural “shifts” whereas the Notes has the singular “shift.” The verb in the 
sentence, “introduces” is singular in both so we conclude the pluralization was a typing mistake. 
It 
must be either “shifts introduce” or “shift introduces.” 


1-42 


52 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


ING BUT an acknowledgment of equality and worth, all parts ARE 
equal. 
This establishes the prerequisite for validity. 


TIB 4lc. 
We said before that the miracle abolishes time. 
It does this 
by a process of COLLAPSING it. 
It thus abolishes certain INTER¬ 
VALS within it. 
It does this, however, WITHIN the larger temporal 
sequence. 


TIB 4ld. 
The validity of the miracle, then, is PREDICTIVE, not logi¬ 
cal, within the temporal schema. 
It establishes an out-of-pattern time 
interval, which is NOT under the usual laws of time. 
Only in this 
sense is it timeless. 
By collapsing time, it literally saves time, much 
the way "daylight saving time" does. 
It rearranges the distribution 
of light. 


TIB 41e. 
The miracle is the only device which man has at his imme¬ 
diate disposal for controlling time. 
Only the Revelation TRAN¬ 
SCENDS it, having nothing to do with time at all. 
The miracle is 
much like the body, in that both are learning aids which aim at fa¬ 
cilitating a state in which they are unnecessary. 
When the Soul is 
finally in the original state of direct communication, neither the 
body nor the miracle serves any purpose. 


TIB 4lf. 
While he is IN the body, however, man can choose between 
loveless and miraculous channels of creativity. 
He can create an 
empty shell (see previous reference), but he DOES NOT create noth¬ 
ing at all. 
He can wait, delay, paralyze himself, reduce his creativity 
almost to nothing, and even introduce a real developmental arrest 
or regression. 
But he CANNOT abolish his creativity. 
He CAN de¬ 
stroy his medium of communication, but NOT his potential. 
T(45) -45 
TIB 4lg. 
He was NOT created by his own free will. 
Only what HE 
creates is his to decide. 
The basic decision of the miracle-minded is 
NOT to wait on time any longer than is necessary. 
Time can waste, 
as well as be wasted. 
The miracle-worker, therefore, accepts the 
time-control factor of the miracle gladly, because he knows that 
every collapse of time brings all men closer to the ultimate RE¬ 
LEASE from time, in which the Son and the Father ARE one. 



53 


1-43 


Volume I Text 


TIB 41h. 
The real meaning of "are of one kind" is "of one mind or 
will." When the will of the Sonship and the Father are one, their per¬ 
fect accord IS Heaven. 
T(46) -46 

TIB 41i. 
ASIDE Tell B. 
he is right in providing you with the consis¬ 
tent strength you need to get, and he needs to offer. 
Your instability 
and his weakness have resulted from bad karmic choices, and your 
relationship NOW is crucial for the future. 
You must both exert 
every effort to restore it to what it once was. 
Both of you are correct¬ 
ing where you have failed before. 
This has already enabled you to 
fulfill a very unexpected role in your own joint salvation, and the 
salvation of many other children I will entrust increasingly to you. 

These are by no means chosen at random. 
B. 
should know that his 
preparation is not only in terms of sharing in the results of your bet¬ 
ter application of some rather unusual talents. 
His own role, which 
he will understand after his preparation is complete, will be equally 
surprising. 
He will need your help then, as you need his strength 
now. 


TIB 4lj. 
Note that you DO NOT need his help as a scribe, because 
you developed this ability by your own efforts, and finally placed 
them at MY disposal. 
By lending you his strength, he strengthens 
himself. 
When he gains this through his own efforts, he will need 
your help in a very unexpected way. 
But this is just another example 
of the reciprocal nature of miracles. 


TIB 4lk. 
Equality does not imply homogeneity NOW. 
When EVE¬ 
RYONE has EVERYTHING, individual contributions to the Sonship 
will no longer be necessary. 
When the Atonement has been com¬ 
pleted, ALL talents will be shared by ALL of the Sons of God. 
God is 
NOT partial. 
All of His children have His total love, and all of his 
gifts are given freely to everyone alike. 


TIB 4ll. 
"Except you become as little children " 83 means unless you 
fully recognize your complete dependence on God, you cannot 

83 Matthew 18:3 And said, “Assuredly, I say to you, unless you are converted and become as little 
children, you will by no means enter the kingdom of heaven.” 


1-44 


54 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


know the real power of the Son in his true relationship with the Fa¬ 
ther. 
T(47) -47 

TIB 4lm. 
You and B. 
DO have special talents which are needed for 
the Celestial speedup at this time. 
But note that the term speed-up is 
not one which relates to the TRANSCENDING of time. 


TIB 4ln. 
When time is abolished, and all of the Sons of God have 
come home, no special agents will be necessary. 
But do not underes¬ 
timate the power of special agents now, or the great need there is for 
them. 
I do not claim to be more than that myself. 
No one in his Right 
Mind, (a term which should be specially noted) ever wants either 
more or less than that. 
Those who are called on to witness for me 
NOW are witnessing for all men, as I am. 


TIB 4lo. 
The role of the Priestess was once to experience 
Revelations and to work miracles. 
The purpose was to bring those 
not yet available for direct Revelations into proper focus for them. 

Heightened perception was always the essential Priestess attribute. 

TIB 41p. 
(This is the first time that HS ever said that she would be 
honored if there were any notes.) 

TIB 4lq. 
(Neither B. 
nor I is really clear about how sexual-impulses 
can be directly translated into miracle-impulses.) The fantasies that I 
mentioned yesterday (refers to discussion HS & B. 
had) provide an 
excellent example of how you switch. 
(Now switch the pronoun ref¬ 
erences, or it will be too confusing.) 

TIB 4lr. 
Fantasies are distorted forms of thinking, because they al¬ 
ways involve twisting perception into unreality. 
Fantasy is a de¬ 
based form of vision. 
Visions and Revelations are closely related. 

Fantasies & projection are more closely associated, because both at¬ 
tempt to control external reality according to false internal needs. 

"Live and let live" happens to be a very meaningful injunction. 


Twist reality in any way, and you are perceiving destructively. 
Real¬ 
ity was lost through usurpation, which in turn produced tyranny. 
I 
told you you were now restored to your former role in the Plan of 
Atonement. 
But you must still choose freely to devote your heritage 


55 


1-45 


Volume I Text 


to the greater Restoration. 
As long as a single slave remains to walk 
the earth, your release is not complete. 
Complete restoration of the 
Sonship is the only true goal of the miracle-minded. 
T(48) -48 

TIB 41s. 
Sexual fantasies are distortions of perception by definition. 

They are a means of making false associations, and obtaining pleas¬ 
ure from them. 
Man can do this only because he IS creative. 
But al¬ 
though he can perceive false associations, he can never make them 
real except to himself. 
As was said before, man believes in what he 
creates. 
If he creates a miracle, he will be equally strong in his belief 
in that. 
The strength of his conviction will then sustain the belief of 
the miracle receiver. 


TIB 4lt. 
NO fantasies, sexual or otherwise, are true. 
Fantasies be¬ 
come totally unnecessary as the Wholly satisfying nature of reality 
becomes apparent. 
The sex impulse IS a miracle impulse when it is 
in proper focus. 
One individual sees in another the right partner for 
"procreating the stock" (Wolff was not too far off here), and also for 
their joint establishment of a creative home. 
This does not involve 
fantasy at all. 
If I am asked to participate in the decision, the deci¬ 
sion will be a Right one, too. 


TIB 41u. 
In a situation where you or another person, or both, ex¬ 
perience inappropriate sex impulses, KNOW FIRST that this is an 
expression of fear. 
Your love toward each other is NOT perfect, and 
this is why the fear arose. 
Turn immediately to me by denying the 
power of the fear, and ask me to help you to replace it with love . 
84 
This shifts the sexual impulse immediately to the miracle-impulse, 
and places it at MY disposal. 


TIB 4lv. 
Then acknowledge the true creative worth of both yourself 
AND the other one. 
This places strength where it belongs. 
Note that 
sexual fantasies are ALWAYS destructive (or depleting), in that they 
perceive another in an inappropriate creative role. 
Both people are 
perceived essentially as "objects" fulfilling TFiEIR OWN pleasure 


84 In the Notes this appears to be “will love” rather than “with love.” In the Urtext manuscript it appears 
as “will (with) love.” It seems fairly clear that the Notes represents a scribal error and the correct word 
is “with.” 


1-46 


56 



Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


drives. 
This dehumanized view is the source of the DEPLETING use 
of sex. 
Freud's description is purely NEGATIVE, i.e., as a release 
from the UNPLEASANT. 
He also observed that the tension from id 
impulses never completely abates. 
T(49) -49 

TIB 41w. 
What he should have said is that the shift from miracle- 
impulses to sexual impulses was debilitating in the first place, be¬ 
cause of the level-confusion involved. 
This set up a state in which 
real release was impossible. 
Note also that Freud's notion of sex was 
as a device for inducing RELAXATION, which he confused with 
PEACE. 


TIB 41x. 
Inappropriate sex relaxes only in the sense that it may in¬ 
duce physical sleep. 
The miracle, on the other hand, is an ENER¬ 
GIZER. 
It always strengthens, and never depletes. 
It DOES induce 
peace, and by establishing tranquility (not relaxation) it enables both 
giver and receiver to enter into a state of Grace. 
Here his miracle- 
mindedness, (not release from tension) is restored. 


TIB 4ly. 
Tension is the result of a building-up of unexpressed mira¬ 
cle-impulses. 
This can be truly abated only by releasing the miracle- 
drive, which has been blocked. 
Converting it to sexual libido merely 
produces further blocking. 
Never foster this illusion in yourself, or 
encourage it in others. 
An "object" is incapable of release, because it 
is a concept which is deprived of creative power. 
The recognition of 
the real creative power in yourself AND others brings release be¬ 
cause it brings peace. 


TIB 4lz. 
The peace of God which passeth understanding CAN keep 
your hearts now and forever. 
85 

TIB 4laa. 
There are only two short additions needed here: 

1. 
Your earlier acute problem in writing things down came from a 
MUCH earlier misuse of very great scribal abilities. 
These were 
turned to secret rather than shared advantage, depriving it (?) of its 
miraculous potential, and diverting it into possession. 
This is much 


: Philippians 4:7 And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall guard your hearts and 
your thoughts in Christ Jesus. 



57 


1-47 



Volume I Text 


like the confusion of sex impulses with possession-impulses. 
Some 
of the original material is still in the Temple. 
This is why you be¬ 
came so afraid about Atlantis. 
B. 
has his own reasons. 
T(50) -50 

TIB 41ab.2. 
Retain your miracle-minded attitude toward Rosie VERY 
carefully. 
She once hurt both of you, which is why she is now your 
servant. 
But she is blessed in that she sees service as a source of joy. 

Help her straighten out her past errors by contributing to your wel¬ 
fare now. 


TIB 4lac. 
(special Revelation re HS - OMISSION 1 , 86 ) 

TIB 4lad. 
HS question re: past memories. 
ANSWER : As long as you 
remember ALWAYS that you never suffered anything because of 
anything that anyone ELSE did, this is not dangerous. 


TIB 41ae. 
Remember that you who want peace can find it only by 
complete forgiveness. 
You never really WANTED peace before, so 
there was no point in knowing how to get it. 
This is an example of 
the "need to know" principle, which was established by the Plan of 
Atonement long before CIA. 


TIB 41af. 
No kind of knowledge is acquired by anyone unless he 
wants it, or believes in some way he NEEDS it. 
A psychologist does 
NOT need a lesson on the hierarchy of needs as such, but like eve¬ 
ryone else, he DOES need to understand his own. 


TIB 41ag. 
This particular set of notes will be the only one which 
deals with the concept of "lack", because while the concept does not 
exist in the Creation of God, it is VERY apparent in the creations of 
man. 
It is, in fact, the essential difference. 



86 From the Notes 5:46-47 the following was omitted: 

“Priestess, a brother has knelt at your shrine. 
Heal Him through Me.” 

I have an idea that the shrine merely represented the “altar within,” which the Priestess served. 
I 
imagine that the communication form was direct, and the “brother” always nameless. 
I - the Priestess 
responded automatically by praying directly to God, standing with upraised arms to draw down a 
blessing on her brother, who knelt outside. 
Her response was completely automatic and impersonal. 

She never even thought of checking the outcome, because there WAS no doubt. 


I imagine there is STILL no doubt really. 
Except that the Priestess can no longer ask alone. 


[Notes 5:47] 

It was originally “sister” not “Priestess.” 


1-48 


58 





Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 4lah. 
A need implies lack, by definition. 
It involves the recogni¬ 
tion, conscious or unconscious, (and at times, fortunately, supercon¬ 
scious) that you would be better off in a state which is somehow dif¬ 
ferent from the one you are in. 


TIB 41ai. 
Until the Separation, which is a better term than the Fall, 87 
nothing was lacking. 
This meant that man had no needs at all. 
If he 

had not deprived himself, he would never have experienced them. 


T(51) -51 

TIB 4laj. 
After the Separation, needs became the most powerful 
source of motivation for human action. 
All behavior is essentially 
motivated by needs, but behavior itself is not a Divine attribute. 
The 
body is the mechanism for behavior. 
(Ask any behaviorist, and he's 
RIGHT, too.) 

TIB 4lak. 
You tell your own classes that nobody would bother even 
to get up and go from one place to another if he did not think he 
would somehow be better off. 
This is very true. 


TIB 4lal. 
Believing that he COULD be "better off" is the reason why 
man has the mechanism for behavior at his disposal. 
This is why the 
Bible says "By their DEEDS ye shall know them." 88 
TIB 41am. 
A man acts according to the particular hierarchy of needs 
he establishes for himself. 
His hierarchy, in turn, depends on his 
perception of what he IS, i.e., what he LACKS. 
This establishes his 
own rules for what he needs to know. 



87 Genesis 3:1-7 Now the serpent was more cunning than any beast of the field which the LORD God 
had made. 
And he said to the woman, “Has God indeed said, “You shall not eat of every tree of the 
garden'?” And the woman said to the serpent, “We may eat the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the 
fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God has said, “You shall not eat it, nor shall you 
touch it, lest you die.” Then the serpent said to the woman, “You will not surely die. 
For God knows 
that in the day you eat of it your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and 
evil.” So when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a 
tree desirable to make one wise, she took of its fruit and ate. 
She also gave to her husband with her, and 
he ate. 
Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they 
sewed fig leaves together and made themselves coverings. 


88 Matthew 7:16- 20 “By their fruits ye shall know them. 
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of 
thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but the corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. 

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 
Every tree 
that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. 
Therefore by their fruits ye shall 
know them.” 


59 


1-49 



Volume I Text 


TIB 4lan. 
Separation from God is the only lack he really needs to 
correct. 
But his Separation would never have occurred if he had not 
distorted his perception of truth, and thus perceived himself as lack¬ 
ing. 


TIB 41 ao. 
The concept of ANY sort of need HIERARCHY arose be¬ 
cause, having made this fundamental error, he had already frag¬ 
mented himself into levels with DIFFERENT needs. 
As he inte¬ 
grates, HE becomes one, and his ONE need becomes one accord¬ 
ingly. 
Only the fragmented can be confused about this. 


TIB 41ap. 
Internal integration within the self will not (suffice to?) 
correct the lack fallacy, but it WILL correct the NEED fallacy. 
(Thank 
you for writing this as given.) Unified need produces unified action, 
because it produces lack of ambivalence. 


TIB 41aq. 
The concept of need hierarchy, a corollary to the original 
error, requires correction at its OWN level, before the error of levels 
itself can be corrected. 
Man cannot operate (or behave) effectively 
while he operates at split levels. 
But as long as he does so, he must 
introduce correction from the bottom UP. 
T(52) -52 

TIB 4lar. 
This is because he now operates in space, where "up" and 
"down" are meaningful terms. 
Ultimately, of course, space is as 
meaningless as time. 
The concept is really one of space-time BELIEF. 

The physical world exists only because man can use it to correct his 
UNBELIEF, which placed him in it originally. 
As long as man 
KNEW he did not need anything, the whole device was unneces¬ 
sary. 


TIB 41as. 
The need to know is not safely under man's control at this 
time. 
It is MUCH better off under mine. 
Let's just leave it at that. 


TIB 41 at. 
(Specific question raised by WT re sex under existing con¬ 
ditions) (HS raised previous question about the past, which has just 
been answered.) 

TIB 41 au. 
The other question, however, I am more than willing to 
answer, because it is appropriate for NOW. 
You and B. 
both chose 


1-50 


60 


Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


your present sex partners shamefully, and would have to atone for 
the lack of love which was involved in any case. 


TIB 4lav. 
You selected them precisely BECAUSE they were NOT 
suited to gratify your fantasies. 
This was not because you wanted to 
abandon or give up the fantasies, but because you were AFRAID of 
them. 
You saw in your partners a means of protecting against the 
fear, but both of you continued to "look around" for chances to in¬ 
dulge the fantasies. 


TIB 41aw. 
The dream of the "perfect partner" is an attempt to find 
EXTERNAL integration, while retaining conflicting needs in the self. 


TIB 4lax. 
B. 
was somewhat less guilty of this than you, but largely 
because he was more afraid. 
He had abandoned the hope (of finding 
a perfect partner) in a neurotic sense of despair of finding it. 
You, on 
the other hand, insisted that the hope was justified. 
Neither of you, 
therefore, was in your Right Mind. 


TIB 4lay. 
As was said before, homosexuality is INHERENTLY more 
risky (or error prone) than heterosexuality, but both can be under¬ 
taken on an equally false basis. 
The falseness of the basis is clear in 
the accompanying fantasies. 
Homosexuality ALWAYS involves 
misperception of the self OR the partner, and generally both. 
T(53) -53 
TIB 4laz. 
Penetration DOES NOT involve magic, nor DOES ANY 
form of sexual behavior. 
It IS a magic belief to engage in ANY form 
of body image activity at all. 
You neither created yourselves, nor 
controlled your creation. 
By introducing levels into your own per¬ 
ception, you opened the way for body-image distortions. 


TIB 4lba. 
The lack of love (or faulty need-orientation) which led to 
your particular person (not OBJECT) choices CAN BE corrected 
within the existent framework, and would HAVE to be in the larger 
interest of overall progress. 
The situation is questionable largely be¬ 
cause of its inherent vulnerability to fantasy-gratification. 
Doing the 
best you can WITHIN this limitation is probably the best corrective 
measure at present. 
Any relationship you have undertaken for 
whatever reasons becomes a responsibility. 



61 


1-51 



Volume I Text 


TIB 41bb. 
If you shift your own needs, some amount of correspond¬ 
ing shift in the need-orientation of the other person MUST result. 

This will be beneficial, even if the partner was originally attracted to 
you BECAUSE of your disrespect. 
Teaching devices which are to¬ 
tally alien to a learner's perceptual system are usually merely dis¬ 
ruptive. 
Transfer depends on SOME common elements in the new 
situation which are understandable in terms of the old. 


TIB 4lbc. 
Man can never control the effects of fear himself, because 
he has CREATED fear and believes in what he creates. 
In attitude, 
then, though not in content, he resembles his own Creator, who has 
perfect faith in His Creations because he Created them. 
All creation 
rests on belief, and the belief in the creation produces its existence. 

This is why it is possible for a man to believe what is not true for 
anyone else. 
It is true for him because it is made BY him. 


TIB 41bd. 
Every aspect of fear proceeds from upside down percep¬ 
tion. 
The TRULY creative devote their efforts to correcting this. 
The 
neurotic devotes his to compromise. 
The psychotic tries to escape by 
establishing the truth of his own errors. 
It is most difficult to free 
him by ordinary means, only because he is more stable in his denial 
of truth. 
T(54) -54 

TIB 42a. 
The miracle makes no distinction among degrees of mis¬ 
perception. 
It is a device for perception-correction which is effective 
quite apart from either the degree or the direction of the error. 
This 
is its TRUE indiscriminateness. 


TIB 42b. 
Christ-controlled miracles are selective only in that they 
are directed toward those who can use them for THEMSELVES. 

Since this makes it inevitable that they will extend them to others, a 
very strong chain of Atonement is welded. 
But Christ-control takes 
no account at all of the MAGNITUDE of the miracle itself, because 
the concept of size exists only in a plane that is itself unreal. 
Since 
the miracle aims at RESTORING reality, it would hardly be useful if 
it were bound by the laws of the same error it aims to correct. 
Only 
man makes that kind of error. 
It is an example of the "foolish consis¬ 
tency" his own false beliefs have engendered. 



1-52 


62 


Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


TIB 42c. 
Both the power and the strength of man's creative will 
must be understood, before the real meaning of denial can be appre¬ 
ciated and abolished. 
Denial is NOT mere negation. 
It is a positive 
miscreation. 
While the miscreation is NECESSARILY believed in by 
its own creator, it does not exist at all at the level of true Creation. 

TIB 43a. 
The miracle compares the creations of man with the higher 
level of creation, accepting what is in ACCORD as true, and reject¬ 
ing the DISCORDANT as false. 
This is why it is so closely associated 
with validity. 
Real validity is both true AND useful, or better, it is 
useful BECAUSE it is true. 


TIB 43b. 
All aspects of fear are untrue, because they DO NOT exist 
at the higher creative levels, and therefore do not exist at all. 
To 
whatever extent a man is willing to submit his beliefs to the real test 

of validity, to that extent are his perceptions healed (or corrected.) 
T(55) -55 

TIB 43c. 
In sorting out the false from the true, the miracle proceeds 
much along the lines suggested very correctly by B., i.e.: 

If-perfect love casts out fear , 89 
And if fear exists, 

Then there is NOT perfect love. 


But 

Only perfect love really exists. 


TIB 43d. 
Therefore, if there is fear, it creates a state which does not 
exist. 
Believe THIS and you WILL be free. 
Only God can establish 
this solution, for THIS faith IS His gift. 
90 

TIC. 
Distortions of Miracle Impulses (Notes 211 5:60) 

T 1 c 1. 
Man must contribute to his readiness here as elsewhere. 
The 
readiness for faith, as for everything else that is true, entails the two 
steps necessary for the release from fear. 


89 1 John 4:18 There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear involves torment. 

But he who fears has not been made perfect in love. 


90 Ephesians 2:8 For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the 
gift of God, 


63 


1-53 



Volume I Text 


T l c 2. 
Denial of fear, in human terms, is a strong defense because it 
entails two levels of error: 

1. 
That truth CAN be denied and 

2. 
That absence of truth can be effective. 


T l c 3. 
EXPERIENCING fear, which is more characteristic of B., in¬ 
volves only the second error. 
However, these differences do not af¬ 
fect the power of the miracle at all, since only truth and error are its 
concern. 


T l c 4. 
YOU are both more miracle-minded, and less able to recog¬ 
nize fear because of your stronger, but split, identification. 
B., also 
characteristically, is less miracle-minded, but better able to recog¬ 
nize fear, because his identification is more consistently right but 
weaker. 


T 1 C 5. 
Together, the conditions needed for consistent miracle- 
mindedness, the state in which fear has been abolished, can be par¬ 
ticularly well worked out. 
In fact, it WAS already well worked out 
before. 
T(56) -56 

T l c 6. 
Your idea about the real meaning of "possession" should be 
clarified. 
Your own denial of fear (this refers to a visionary experi¬ 
ence of HS) introduced some error variance, but not really a signifi¬ 
cant amount. 
However, there is always a chance that as the size of 
the sample increases, what was non-significant before may ATTAIN 
significance, so we had better get this out of the way now while you 
are still within the safety margin. 


T l c 7. 
Fear of possession is a perverted expression of the fear of the 
irresistible attraction. 
(Aside. 
Yes, this DOES apply to homosexual¬ 
ity, among other errors, where the whole concept of possessing, or 
"entering" is a key fear. 
It is a symbolic statement of an inverted de¬ 
cision NOT to enter into, or possess, the Kingdom. 
In physical 
terms, which it emphasizes because of the inherent error of Soul 
avoidance, REAL physical creation is avoided, and fantasy gratifica¬ 
tion is substituted.) 


1-54 


64 


Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


T 1 C 8. 
The truth is still that the attraction of God is irresistible at 
ALL levels, and the acceptance of this totally unavoidable truth is 
only a matter of time. 
But you should consider whether you WANT 
to wait, because you CAN return now, if you choose. 
(Note to HS: 
You are writing this with improper motivation, but we will try 
anyway. 
If you are to stop, do so immediately.) 

T 1 c 9. 
Possession is a concept which has been subject to numerous 
distortions, some of which we will list below: T(57) -57 

1. 
It (possession) can be associated with the body only. 
If this occurs, 
sex is particularly likely to be contaminated. 
Possession versus being 
possessed is apt to be seen as the male and female role. 
Since neither 
will be conceived of as satisfying alone, and both will be associated 
with fear, this interpretation is particularly vulnerable to psycho- 
sexual confusion. 


2. 
From a rather similar misperceptual reference point, possession 
can also be associated with things. 
This is essentially a shift from 1), 
and is usually due to an underlying fear of associating possession 
with people. 
In this sense, it is an attempt to PROTECT people, like 
the superstition about "protecting the name", we mentioned before. 


T 1 c 10. 
Both l) and 2) are likely to become compulsive for several 
reasons, including: 

a. 
They represent an attempt to escape from the real possession- 
drive, which cannot be satisfied this way. 


b. 
They set up substitute goals, which are usually reasonably easy to 
attain. 


c. 
They APPEAR to be relatively harmless, and thus SEEM to allay 
fear. 
The fact that they usually interfere with good interpersonal re¬ 
lationships can be interpreted, in this culture, as a lack of sophistica¬ 
tion on the part of the OTHER (not the self), and this induces a false 
feeling of confidence in the solution, based on reliability NOT valid¬ 
ity. 
It is also fairly easy to find a partner who SHARES the illusion. 

Thus, we have any number of relationships which are actually ES- 


65 


1-55 


Volume I Text 


TABLISHED on the basisT(58) -58 of l), and others which HOLD TO¬ 
GETHER primarily because of the joint interests in 2). 

d. 
The manifestly EXTERNAL emphasis which both entail seems to 
be a safety device, and thus permits a false escape from much more 
basic inhibitions. 
As a compromise solution, the ILLUSION of inter¬ 
personal relating is preserved, along with the retention of the lack of 
love component. 
This kind of psychic juggling leaves the person (or 
juggler?) with a feeling of emptiness, which in fact is perfectly justi¬ 
fied, because he IS acting from scarcity. 
He then becomes more and 
more driven in his behavior, to fill the emptiness. 


T l c 11. 
When these solutions have been invested with extreme be¬ 
lief, l) leads to sex crimes, and 2) to stealing. 
The kleptomaniac is a 
good example of the latter. 


T l c 12. 
Generally, two types of emotional disturbances result: 

a. 
The tendency to maintain the illusion that only the physical is 
real. 
This produces depression. 


b. 
The tendency to invest the physical with non-physical properties. 

This is essentially magic, and tends more toward anxiety-proneness. 


c. 
The tendency to vacillate from one to the other, which produces a 
corresponding vacillation between depression AND anxiety. 


T 1 C 13. 
Both result in self imposed starvation. 
91 
T l c 14. 
3. 
Another type of distortion is seen in the fear of or desire 
for "spirit" possession. 
The term "spirit" is profoundly debased in 
this context, but it DOES entail a recognition that T(59) -59 the body is 
not enough, and investing it with magic will not work. 
This recogni¬ 
tion ACCEPTS the fact that neither 1) nor 2) is sufficient, but, pre¬ 
cisely BECAUSE it does not limit fear so narrowly, it is more likely 
to produce greater fear in its own right. 


91 It is odd that it says “two things happen” and then lists three and then describes all three as “both.” 
But that is the form in the Notes. 
This material is not preserved in any other version available to us. 

However, there are actually two, A) and B) with C) being a mix of the two which could be considered a 
third. 



1-56 


66 





Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


T 1 C 15. 
Endowing the Spirit with human possessiveness is a more 
INCLUSIVE error than 1) or 2), and a step somewhat further away 
from the "Right Mind." Projection is also more likely to occur, with 
vacillations between grandiosity and fear. 
"Religion" in a distorted 
sense, is also more likely to occur in this kind of error, because the 
idea of a "spirit" is introduced, though fallaciously, while it is ex¬ 
cluded from 1) and 2). 


T 1 c 16. 
Witchcraft is thus particularly apt to be associated with 3), 
because of the much greater investment in magic. 


T 1 C 17. 
It should be noted that 1) involves only the body, and 2) in¬ 
volves an attempt to associate things with human attributes. 
Three, 
on the other hand, is a more serious level confusion, because it en¬ 
dows the Spirit with EVIL attributes. 
This accounts both for the reli¬ 
gious zeal of its proponents, and the aversion (or fear) of its oppo¬ 
nents. 
Both attitudes stem from the same false belief. 


T 1 c 18. 
This is NOT what the Bible means by "possessed of the Holy 
Spirit." It is interesting to note that even those who DID understand 
that could nevertheless EXPRESS their understanding inappropri¬ 
ately. 
The concept of "speaking T(60) -60 in many tongues" was origi¬ 
nally an injunction to communicate to everyone in his own lan¬ 
guage, or his own level. 
It hardly meant to speak in a way that NO¬ 
BODY can understand. 
This strange error occurs when people DO 
understand the need for Universal communication, but have con¬ 
taminated it with possession fallacies. 
The fear engendered by this 
misperception leads to a conflicted state in which communication IS 
attempted, but the fear is allayed by making the communication in¬ 
comprehensible . 


T 1 c 19. 
It could also be said that the fear induced selfishness, or re¬ 
gression, because incomprehensible communication is hardly a wor¬ 
thy offering from one Son of God to another. 


T 1 c 20. 
4. 
Knowledge can also be misinterpreted as a means of pos¬ 
session. 
Here, the content is not physical, and the underlying fallacy 
is more likely to be the confusion of mind and brain. 
The attempt to 
unite non-physical content with physical attributes is illustrated by 


67 


1-57 


Volume I Text 


statements like "the thirst for knowledge." (No Helen, this is NOT 
what the "thirst" in the Bible means. 
The term was used only be¬ 
cause of man's limited comprehension, and is probably better 
dropped.) 

T l c 21. 
The fallacious use of knowledge can result in several errors, 
including: 

a. 
The idea that knowledge will make the individual more attractive 
to others. 
This is a possession-fallacy. 


b. 
The idea that knowledge will make the individual invulnerable. 

This is the reaction formation against the underlying fear of vulner¬ 
ability. 
T(61) -61 

c. 
The idea that knowledge will make the individual worthy. 
This is 
largely pathetic. 


T l c 22. 
Both you and B. 
should consider type 4) VERY carefully. 


Like all these fallacies, it contains a denial mechanism, which swings 
into operation as the fear increases, thus canceling out the error 
temporarily, but seriously impairing efficiency. 


T 1 C 23. 
Thus, you claim you can't read, and B. 
claims that he can't 
speak. 
Note that depression is a real risk here, for a Child of God 
should never REDUCE his efficiency in ANY way. 
The depression 
comes from a peculiar pseudo-solution which reads: 

A Child of God is efficient. 


I am not efficient. 


Therefore, I am not a Child of God. 


T 1 C 24. 
This leads to neurotic resignation, and this is a state which 
merely INCREASES the depression. 


T 1 C 25. 
The 92 corresponding denial mechanism for 1) is the sense of 
PHYSICAL inability, or IMPOTENCE. 
The denial mechanism for 2) 
is often bankruptcy. 
Collectors of things often drive themselves well 


92 {(Ed. 
Note) The following paragraph shows up and is crossed out, and is repeated on Urtext page 69 
(T 2 A 16-19) with the last sentence missing. 
One might argue that it should only have been included 
once however we decided to include it in both locations. 
This material has not been located in the 
Notes .} 


1-58 


68 




Chapter 1 - Introduction to Miracles 


beyond their financial means, in an attempt to force discontinuance. 

If this idea of cessation cannot be tolerated, a strange compromise 
involving BOTH insatiable possessiveness and insatiable throwing- 
away (bankruptcy) may result. 
An example is the inveterate or 
compulsive gambler, particularly the horse-racing addict. 
Here, the 
conflicted drive is displaced both from people AND things, and is 
invested in animals. 
The implied DEROGATION of people is the 
cause of the underlying EXTREME superstition of the horse racing 
addict. 
T(62) -62 


PROOF 


69 


COPY 


1-59 


Volume I Text 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 

T 2 A. 
Introduction (Not present in Notes) 

(Insert for page 61) 

T 2 A l. 
This section is inserted here because it deals with a more fun¬ 
damental misuse of knowledge, referred to in the Bible as the cause 
of the Fall (or Separation). 
There are several introductory remarks 
which are intended to make these explanations less fear-provoking. 

The first is a couplet which I drew to your attention during the 
fragments of Midsummer Night's Dream, which you heard last 
night: 

"Be as thou wast wont to be 
See as thou wast wont to see." 

It is noteworthy that these words were said by Oberon in releasing 
Titania from her own errors, both of being and perceiving. 
These 
were the words which re-established her true identity as well as her 
true abilities and judgment. 
The similarity here is obvious. 


T 2 A 2. 
There are also some definitions, which I asked you to take 
from the dictionary, which will also be helpful. 
Their somewhat un¬ 
usual nature is due to the fact that they are not first definitions in 
their chronological appearance. 
Nevertheless, the fact that each of 
them does appear in the dictionary should be reassuring. 


Project (verb): to extend forward or out. 


Project (noun): a plan in the mind 

World: a natural grand division. 
(Note that you originally wrote 
"word" instead of "world.") 

T 2 A 3. 
We will refer later to projection as related to both mental ill¬ 
ness and mental health. 
It will also be commented on that Lucifer 
literally projected himself from heaven. 
We also have observed that 
man can create an empty shell, but cannot create nothing at all. 
T(63) 
63 This emptiness provides the screen for the misuse of projection. 



1-60 


70 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


T 2 A 4. 
The Garden of Eden, which is described as a literal garden in 
the Bible, was not originally an actual garden at all. 
It was merely a 
mental state of complete need-lack. 
Even in the literal account, it is 
noteworthy that the pre-Separation state was essentially one in 
which man needed nothing. 
The Tree of Knowledge, again an 
overly-literal concept, (as is clearly shown by the subsequent refer¬ 
ence to "eating of the fruit of the tree") is a symbolic reference to 
some of the misuses of knowledge referred to in the section imme¬ 
diately preceding this one. 
There is, however, considerable clarifica¬ 
tion of this concept, which must be understood before the real 
meaning of the "detour into fear" can be fully comprehended. 
Pro¬ 
jection, as defined above, (this refers to the verb) is a fundamental 
attribute of God, which he also gave to his Son. 
In the Creation, God 
projected his Creative Ability out of Himself toward the Souls which 
He created, and also imbued them with the same loving wish (or 
will) to create. 
We have commented before on the FUNDAMENTAL 
error involved in confusing what has been created with what is be¬ 
ing created. 
We have also emphasized that man, insofar as the term 
relates to Soul, has not only been fully Created, but also been cre¬ 
ated perfect. 
There is no emptiness in him. 
The next point, too, has 
already been made, but bears repetition here. 
The Soul, because of 
its own likeness to its Creator, is creative . 
93 No Child of God is capa¬ 
ble of losing this ability, because it is inherent in what he IS. 


T 2 A 5. 
Whenever projection in its inappropriate sense is utilized, it 
ALWAYS implies that some emptiness (or lack of everything) must 
exist, and that it is within man's ability to put his own ideas there 
INSTEAD of the truth. 
If you will consider carefully what this en¬ 
tails, the following will become quite apparent: T(64) -64 
First, the assumption is implicit that what God has Created can be 
changed by the mind of Man. 



93 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



71 


1-61 



Volume I Text 


Second, the concept that what is perfect can be rendered imperfect (or 
wanting) is intruded. 


Third, the belief that man can distort the Creations of God (including 
himself) has arisen, and is tolerated. 


Fourth, that since man can create himself, the direction of his own 
creation is up to him. 


T 2 A 6. 
These related distortions represent a picture of what actually 
occurred in the Separation. 
None of this existed before, nor does it 
actually exist now. 
The world, as defined above, WAS made as a 
natural grand division, or projecting outward of God. 
That is why 
everything which He Created is like Him. 


T 2 A 7. 
It should be noted that the opposite of pro is con. 
Strictly 
speaking, then, the opposite of projecting is conjecting, a term which 
referred to a state of uncertainty or guess work. 
Other errors arise in 
connection with ancillary defenses, to be considered later. 
For ex¬ 
ample, dejection, which is obviously associated with depression, 
injection, which can be misinterpreted readily enough, in terms of 
possession fallacies (particularly penetration), and rejection, which 
is clearly associated with denial. 
It should be noted also that rejec¬ 
tion can be used as refusing, a term which necessarily involves a 
perception of what is refused as something unworthy. 


T 2 A 8. 
Projection as undertaken by God was very similar to the kind 
of inner radiance which the Children of the Father inherit from Him. 

It is important to note that the term "project outward" necessarily 
implies that the real source of projection is internal. 
T(65) -65 This is 
as true of the Son as of the Father. 


T 2 A 9. 
The world, in its original connotation, included both the 
proper creation of man by God, AND the proper creation by man in 
his Right Mind. 
The latter required the endowment of man by God 
with free will, because all loving creation is freely given. 
Nothing in 
either of these statements implies any sort of level involvement, or, 
in fact, anything except one continuous line of creation, in which all 
aspects are of the same order. 



1-62 


72 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


T 2 A 10. 
When the "lies of the serpent" were introduced, they were 
specifically called lies because they are not true. 
When man listened, 
all he heard was untruth. 
He does not have to continue to believe 
what is not true, unless he chooses to do so. 
All of his miscreations 
can disappear in the well known "twinkling of an eye", 94 because it 
is a visual misperception. 


T 2 A ll. 
Man's spiritual eye can sleep, but as will shortly appear in 
the notes (reference Bob, elevator operator) a sleeping eye can still 
see. 
One translation of the Fall, a view emphasized by Mary Baker 
Eddy, and worthy of note, is that "a deep sleep fell upon Adam." 95 
While the Bible continues to associate this sleep as a kind of anes¬ 
thetic utilized for protection of Adam during the creation of Eve, 
Mrs. 
Eddy was correct in emphasizing that nowhere is there any 
reference made to his waking up. 
While Christian Science is clearly 
incomplete, this point is much in its favor. 


T 2 A 12. 
The history of man in the world as he saw it has not been 
characterized by any genuine or comprehensive re-awakening, or 
re-birth. 
T(66) -66 This is impossible as long as man projects in the 
spirit of miscreation. 
It still remains within him to project as God 
projected his own Spirit to him. 
In reality, this is his ONLY choice, 
because his free will was made for his own joy in creating the per¬ 
fect. 


T 2 A 13. 
All fear is ultimately reducible to the basic misperception of 
man's ability to USURP the power of God. 
It is again emphasized 
that he neither CAN nor HAS been able to do this. 
In this statement 
lies the real justification for his escape from fear. 
This is brought 
about by his acceptance of the Atonement, which places him in a 
position to realize that his own errors never really occurred. 
T(67) -67 


94 Corinthians 15:52 In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. 
For the trumpet will 
sound, and the dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. 
1 

95 Genesis 2:21 And the LORD God caused a deep sleep to fall on Adam, and he slept; and He took one 
of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in its place. 



73 


1-63 



Volume I Text 


T 2 A 14. 
When the deep sleep 96 fell upon Adam, he was then in a 
condition to experience nightmares, precisely because he was sleep¬ 
ing. 
If a light is suddenly turned on while someone is dreaming, and 
the content of his dream is fearful, he is initially likely to interpret 
the light itself as part of the content of his own dream. 
However, as 
soon as he awakens, the light is correctly perceived as the release 
from the dream, which is no longer accorded reality. 
I would like to 
conclude this with the Biblical injunction "Go ye and do likewise." 97 
It is quite apparent that this depends on the kind of knowledge 
which was NOT referred to by the "Tree of Knowledge" which bore 
lies as fruit. 
The knowledge that illuminates rather than obscures is 
the knowledge which not only makes you free, but also shows you 
clearly that you ARE free. 
98 T(68) -68 

Lead in for p. 
61 (after insert) 

T 2 A 15. 
The preceding sections were inserted because of the neces¬ 
sity of distinguishing between real and false knowledge. 
Having 
made this distinction, it is well to return to the errors already listed a 
while back. 
It might be well to recapitulate them here. 
The first in¬ 
volved the fallacy that only the physical is real. 
The second involved 
things rather than people. 
The third involves the endowment of the 
physical with non-physical properties. 
And the fourth clarified the 
misuse of knowledge. 
All of them were subsumed under possession 
fallacies. 
The denial mechanism for three has already been set forth 
in some detail, and will also continue after the following: 

T(69) -69 (Retyped) 

T 2 A 16. 
The corresponding denial mechanism for 1) is the sense of 
PHYSICAL inability, or IMPOTENCE. 
The denial mechanism for 2) 
is often bankruptcy. 
Collectors of things often drive themselves well 
beyond their financial means, in an attempt to force discontinuance. 


96 Genesis 2:21 as above. 


97 It is unclear from the text whether a paragraph break is really intended. 
The previous line stops 
before the end but there is no indentation on the next line. 
The HLC puts a paragraph break here and 
we feel it is appropriate. 
The material has not been found in the Notes. 


98 John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 


1-64 


74 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


If this idea of cessation cannot be tolerated, a strange compromise 
involving BOTH insatiable possessiveness and insatiable throwing- 
away (bankruptcy) may result. 
An example is the inveterate or 
compulsive gambler, particularly the horse-racing addict. 
Here, the 
conflicted drive is displaced both from people AND things, and is 
invested in animals. 
The implied DEROGATION of people is the 
cause of the underlying EXTREME superstition of the horse racing 
addict. 


T 2 A 17. 
The alcoholic is in a similar position, except that his hostility 
is more inward than outward directed. 


T 2 A 18. 
Defenses aimed at protecting (or retaining) error are particu¬ 
larly hard to undo, because they introduce second-order mispercep¬ 
tions which obscure the underlying errors still further. 
T(70) -70 

T 2 A 19. 
The pseudo-corrective mechanism of three is apt to be more 
varied because of the more inclusive nature of the error, which has 
already been mentioned. 
Some of the possibilities are listed below: 

T 2 A 20. 
One aspect of the possession/possessed conflict can be raised 
to predominance. 
If this is attempted in connection with POSSESS¬ 
ING, it leads to the paranoid solution. 
The underlying component of 
"being possessed" is retained in the "persecution" fantasies, which 
are generally concomitants. 


T 2 A 21. 
If "being possessed" is brought to ascendance, a state of 
some sort of possession by external forces results, but NOT with a 
major emphasis on attacking others. 
Attack BY others becomes the 
more obvious component. 
In the more virulent forms, there is a 
sense of being possessed by demons, and unless there is vacillation 
with a), a catatonic solution is more likely than a paranoid one. 


T 2 A 22. 
The FOCUSED paranoid has become more rigid in his solu¬ 
tion, and centers on ONE source of projection to escape from vacilla¬ 
tion. 
(Aside: It should be noted that this type of paranoia is an up¬ 
side down form of religion, because of its obvious attempt to unify 
into oneness.) 


75 


1-65 




Volume I Text 


T 2 A 23. 
Both 1, 2, and 4 are more likely to produce neurotic" rather 
than psychotic states, though this is by no means guaranteed. 
How¬ 
ever, 3 is inherently more vulnerable to the psychotic correction, 
again because of the more fundamental level confusion which is in¬ 
volved. 


T 2 A 24. 
It should be noted, however, that the greater fear which is 
induced by 3 can ITSELF reach psychotic proportions, thus forcing 
the individual closer and closer to a psychotic solution. 
T(71) -71 

T 2 A 25. 
It is emphasized here that these differences have no effect at 
all on the miracle, which can heal any of them with equal ease. 
This 
is because of the miracle's inherent avoidance of within-error dis¬ 
tinctions. 
Its SOLE concern is to distinguish between truth, on the 
one hand, and ALL kinds of error, on the other. 
This is why some 
miracles SEEM to be of greater magnitude than others. 
But remem¬ 
ber the first point in this course, i.e., that there is no order of diffi¬ 
culty in miracles. 


T 2 A 26. 
The emphasis on mental illness which is marked in these 
notes reflects the "UNDOING" aspect of the miracle. 
The "DOING" 
aspect is, of course, much more important. 
But a true miracle cannot 
occur on a false basis. 
Sometimes the undoing must precede it. 


T 2 A 27. 
At other times, both can occur simultaneously, but you are 
not up to this at the moment. 


T 2 A 28. 
Further, insights into mental illness can be misused, and 
lead to preoccupation with one's own symptoms. 
This is why this 
area is less constructive for most people than a course primarily de¬ 
voted to mental health. 
However, some professions will find 
(some?) principles of mental illness constructive, especially those 
which are concerned with mental illness in others. 
This obviously 
includes psychologists. 


99 The word “neurotic” is written in by hand, apparently NOT Helen’s hand. 
It is in all caps. 
Many 
handwritten corrections are erratic as to capitalization. 
It’s not clear this was intended to be capitalized. 

In the Notes the word is present, and not emphasized. 



1-66 


76 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


T 2 A 29. 
The obvious correction for ALL types of the possession- 
fallacy is to redefine possession correctly. 
In the sense of "taking 
over/' the concept does not exist at all in divine reality, which is the 

only level of reality where real existence is a meaningful term. 
T(72) - 
72 

T 2 A 30. 
No one CAN be "taken over" unless he wills to be. 
How¬ 
ever, if he places his mind under tyranny, rather than authority, he 
intrudes the submission/dominance concept 100 onto free will him¬ 
self. 
This produces the obvious contradiction inherent in any formu¬ 
lation that associates free will with imprisonment. 
Even in very mild 
forms, this kind of association is risky, and may spread quite unex¬ 
pectedly, particularly under external stress. 
This is because it can be 
internally controlled ONLY if EXTERNAL conditions are peaceful. 

This is not safe, because external conditions are produced by the 
thoughts of many, not all of whom are pure in heart as yet. 


T 2 A 31. 
Why should you be at THEIR mercy? This issue is VERY 
closely related to the whole possession issue. 
You insist on thinking 
that people CAN possess you, if you believe that their thoughts (or 
the external environment) can affect you, regardless of WHAT they 
think. 
You are perfectly unaffected by ALL expressions of lack of 
love. 
These can be either from yourself and others, or from yourself 
to others, or from others to you. 
(I'm glad you passed that test. 
It 
was crucial. 
This is ref. 
to HS reluctance to take dictations as given.) 

T 2 A 32. 
Peace is an attribute in YOU. 
You cannot find it outside. 
101 
All mental illness is some form of EXTERNAL searching. 
Mental 
health is INNER peace. 
It enables you to remain unshaken by lack of 
love from without, and capable, through your own miracles of cor¬ 
recting the external conditions, which proceed from lack of love in 
others. 



100 The word “concept” is not in the Ur, but is in the Notes. 
It appears to be an inadvertent omission. 


101 Deuteronomy 4:29 But from there you will seek the LORD your God, and you will find Him if you 
seek Him with all your heart and with all your soul. 



77 


1-67 



Volume I Text 


T 2 B. 
The Re-interpretation of Defenses (Notes 230 5:79) 

T 2 B l. 
When you are afraid of ANYTHING, you are acknowledging 
its power to hurt you. 
Remember that where your heart is, there is 
your treasure 102 also. 
This means that you believe in what you 
VALUE. 
T(73) -73 If you are AFRAID, you are VALUING WRONG. 

Human understanding will inevitably value wrong, and by endow¬ 
ing all human thoughts with equal power, will inevitably DESTROY 
peace. 
This is why the Bible speaks of "The peace of God which 
PASSETH (human) understanding." 103 

T 2 B 2. 
THIS peace is totally incapable of being shaken by human 
errors of any kind. 
It denies the ability of anything which is not of 
God to effect you in any way. 


T 2 B 3. 
This is the PROPER use of denial. 
It is not used to HIDE any¬ 
thing, but it IS used to correct error. 
It brings ALL error into the 
light, and since error and darkness are the same, it abolishes error 
automatically. 


T 2 B 4. 
True denial is a very powerful protective device. 
You can and 
should deny any belief that error can hurt you. 
This kind of denial is 
NOT a concealment device, but a correction device. 
The "Right 
Mind" of the mentally healthy DEPENDS on it. 


T 2 B 5. 
You can do ANYTHING I ask. 
I have asked you to perform 
miracles, 104 and have made it VERY clear that these are NATURAL, 
CORRECTIVE, HEALING, and UNIVERSAL. 
There is nothing good 
they cannot do. 
But they cannot be performed in the spirit of 
doubt. 
105 Remember my own question, before you ask yours "Oh ye 


10:1 Matthew 6:21 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. 


103 Philippians 4:7 And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts 
and minds through Christ Jesus. 


104 Matthew 10:1 And when He had called His twelve disciples to Him, He gave them power over 
unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all kinds of sickness and all kinds of disease. 


105 Matthew 17:19-20 Then the disciples came to Jesus privately and said, “Why could we not cast it 
out?” 

So Jesus said to them, “Because of your unbelief; for assuredly, I say to you, if you have faith as a 
mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move; and nothing 
will be impossible for you.” 


1-68 


78 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


of little faith, wherefore didst 106 thou DOUBT." 107 (Reference to 
Christ and the apostles walking on water.) 

T 2 B 6. 
You have asked YOURSELVES why you cannot really incor¬ 
porate my words (the idea of cannibalism in connection with the 
Sacrament is a reflection of a distorted view of sharing. 
I told you 
before that the word "thirst" in connection with the Spirit was used 
in the Bible because of the limited understanding of those to whom I 
spoke. 
I also told you NOT to use it. 
The same holds for expressions 
like "feeding on.") T(74) -74 Symbiosis is misunderstood by the men¬ 
tally ill, who use it that way. 
But I also told you that you must rec¬ 
ognize your total dependence on God, a statement which you did 
not like.) 

T 2 B 7. 
God and the Souls He created ARE symbiotically related. 

They are COMPLETELY dependent on each other. 
The creation of 
the Soul itself has already been perfectly accomplished, but the crea¬ 
tion BY Souls has not. 
God created Souls so He could depend on 
them BECAUSE He created them perfectly. 
He gave them His peace 
so they would not be shaken, and would be unable to be deceived. 

Whenever you are afraid, you ARE deceived. 
Your mind is NOT 
serving your Soul. 
This literally starves the Soul by denying its daily 
bread. 
108 Remember the poem about the Holy Family which crossed 
your mind last night: 

“Wliere tricks of words are never said 
And mercy is as plain as bread." 

The reason why that had such a strong impact on you originally was 
because you knew what it MEANT. 


T 2 B 8. 
God offers ONLY mercy. 
Your own words should ALWAYS 
reflect only mercy, because that is what you have received, and that 
is what you should GIVE. 
Justice is a temporary expedient, or an 
attempt to teach man the meaning of mercy. 
Its JUDGMENTAL side 

106 Spelling correction: manuscript has “didsth.” 

107 Matthew 8:26 And he saith unto them, “Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith?” Then he arose, and 
rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm. 


108 Matthew 6:11 “Give us this day our daily bread.” 


79 


1-69 



Volume I Text 


rises only because man is capable of INJUSTICE if that is what his 
mind creates. 
You are afraid of God's will because you have used 
your own will, which He created in the likeness of His own, 109 to 
MISCREATE . 


T2B9. 
What you do NOT realize is that the mind can miscreate only 
when it is NOT free. 
An imprisoned mind is not free by definition. 
It 
is possessed, or held back, by ITSELF. 
Its will is therefore limited, 
and not free to assert itself. 
T(75) -75 

T 2 B to. 
The three things that crossed your mind, which was com¬ 
paratively free at the time, are perfectly relevant: 

T 2 B ll. 
1. 
It is alright to remember the past, PROVIDED you also 
remember that ANYTHING you suffer is because of YOUR OWN 
ERRORS. 


T 2 B 12. 
2. 
In this context, your remark that "after the burning, I 
swore if I ever saw him again, I would (not) ("Not" was written in 
later) recognize him. 
Note, by the way, that you did not put in the 
"not" until afterwards. 
That is because your inherent correction- 
device was working properly at the moment. 
The result is that you 
are NOT DENYING ME. 


T 2 B 13. 
3. 
The story about Hinda. 
This was an excellent example of 
misperception which led to a totally unwarranted fear of a PERSON. 

(HS story refers to a very young child who fell down the stairs when 
HS had arms open in a welcoming gesture at bottom of stairs. 
For 
years afterwards, Hinda screamed upon seeing HS.) The mis-step 
which caused her fall had nothing at all to do with you, just as your 
own mis-steps have nothing at all to do with me. 


T 2 B 14. 
Denial of error is a very powerful defense of truth. 
We have 
slowly been shifting the emphasis from the negative to the positive 
use of denial. 
Remember, we have already stated that denial is not a 

109 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



1-70 


80 





Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


purely negative device; it results in positive miscreation. 
That is the 
way the mentally ill DO employ it. 
T(76) -76 

T 2 B 15. 
But remember a very early thought of your own, "Never 
underestimate the power of denial." In the service of the "Right 
Mind", the denial of ERROR frees the mind and re-establishes the 
freedom of the will. 
When the will is REALLY free, it CANNOT 
miscreate, because it recognizes ONLY TRUTH. 


T 2 B 16. 
Projection arises out of FALSE DENIAL. 
Not out of its 
proper use. 
My own role in the Atonement IS one of true projection, 
i.e., I can project to YOU the affirmation of truth. 
If you project error 
to me (or to yourself) you are interfering with the process. 
My use of 
projection, which can also be yours, is NOT based on faulty denial. 

But it DOES involve the very powerful use of the denial of error. 


T 2 B 17. 
The miracle worker is one who accepts my kind of denial 
and projection, unites his own inherent abilities to deny and project 
with mine, and imposes them back on himself and others. 
This es¬ 
tablishes the total lack of threat anywhere. 
Together we can then 
work for the real time of peace, which is Eternal. 


T 2 B 18.1 inspired Bob (ref. 
to elevator man who took HS down from 
her apt.) to make that remark to you, and it is a pity that you heard 
only the last part. 
But you can still use that. 
His remark ended with: 
"Every shut eye is not asleep." Since your own vision is much im¬ 
proved at the moment, we will go on a while. 


T 2 B 19. 
Freud's identification of mechanisms was quite correct, as 
was his recognition of their creative ability. 
They can INDEED cre¬ 
ate man's perception, both of himself and his surroundings. 
T(77) -77 
T 2 B 20. 
But Freud's limitations induced inevitable limits on his own 
perception. 
He made two kinds of errors. 


T 2 B 21. 
The first is that he saw only how the mechanisms worked in 
the mentally ill. 


T 2 B 22. 
The second is his own denial of the mechanism of the Atone¬ 
ment. 



81 


1-71 



Volume I Text 


T 2 B 23. 
Let us take up the first, because a clear understanding of the 
second depends on it. 


T 2 B 24. 
Denial should be directed only to error, and projection 
should be limited to truth. 
You should truly give as you have truly 
received. 
The Golden Rule 110 can work effectively only on this basis. 

T 2 B 25. 
Intellectualization is a poor word, which stems from the 
brain-mind confusion. 
"Right-Mindedness" is better. 
This device 
defends the RIGHT MIND, and gives it control over the body. 
"In¬ 
tellectualization" implies a split, whereas "Right-Mindedness" in¬ 
volves healing. 


T 2 B 26. 
Withdrawal is properly employed in the service of with¬ 
drawing from the desert. 
It is NOT a device for escape, but for con¬ 
solidation. 
There IS only One Mind. 


T 2 B 27. 
Dissociation is quite similar. 
You should split yourself off 
from error, but only in defense of integration. 


T 2 B 28. 
Detachment is essentially a weaker form of dissociation. 
This 
is one of the major areas of withholding that both you and B. 
are en¬ 
gaging in. 


T 2 B 29. 
Flight can be undertaken in whatever direction you choose, 
but note that the concept itself implies flight FROM something. 

Flight from error is perfectly appropriate. 
T(78) -78 

T 2 B 30. 
Distantiation is a way of putting distance between yourself 
and what you SHOULD fly from. 


T 2 B 31. 
Regression is a real effort to return to your own original 
state. 
In this sense, it is utilized to RESTORE, not to go back to the 
less mature. 


T 2 B 32. 
Sublimation should be associated with the SUBLIME. 


T 2 B 33. 
There are many other so-called "dynamic" concepts which 
are profound errors due essentially to the misuse of defenses. 


110 Matthew 7:12 “Therefore, whatever you want men to do to you, do also to them, for this is the Law 
and the Prophets.” 


1-72 


82 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


Among them is the concept of different levels of aspiration, which 
results from real level confusion. 


T 2 B 34. 
However, the main point to be understood from these notes 
is that you can defend truth as well as error, and in fact, much bet¬ 
ter. 


T 2 B 35. 
So far we have concentrated on ends rather than means be¬ 
cause unless you regard an end as worth achieving, you will not de¬ 
vote yourself to the means by which it can BE achieved. 
Your own 
question enabled me to shift the emphasis from end to means. 

(Question asked was "how can we incorporate this material?") You 
and B. 
HAVE accepted the end as valuable, thus signifying your 
willingness to use defenses to ensure it. 


T 2 B 36. 
The means are easier to clarify after the true worth of the 
goal itself is firmly established. 


T 2 B 37. 
Everyone defends his own treasure. 
You do not have to tell 
him to do this, because HE will do so automatically. 
The real ques¬ 
tion still remains WHAT do you treasure, and HOW MUCH do you 
treasure it? 

T 2 B 38. 
Once you learn to consider these two points, and bring them 
into ALL your actions as the true criteria for behavior, I will have 
little difficulty in clarifying the means. 
You have not learned to be 
consistent about this as yet. 
I have therefore concentrated on show¬ 
ing you that the means ARE available whenever you DO ask. 
T(79) - 
79 

T 2 B 39. 
You can save a lot of time, however, if you do not need to 
extend this step unduly. 
The correct focus will shorten it immeas¬ 
urably. 


T 2 B 40. 
Papers will be very easy to write as this time is shortened. 

T(80) 80 

T 2 B 41. 
The 111 Atonement is the ONLY defense which cannot be 
used destructively. 
That is because, while everyone must eventually 
join it, it was not a device which was generated by man. 
The 


111 Nov. 
13 


83 


1-73 




Volume I Text 


Atonement PRINCIPLE was in effect long before the Atonement it¬ 
self was begun. 
The Principle was love, and the Atonement itself, 
was an ACT of love. 
Acts were not necessary before the Separation, 
because the time-space belief did not exist. 


T 2 B 42. 
It was only after the Separation that the defense of Atone¬ 
ment, and the necessary conditions for its fulfillment were planned. 

It became increasingly apparent that all of the defenses which man 
can choose to use constructively or destructively were not enough to 
save him. 
It was therefore decided that he needed a defense which 
was so splendid that he could not misuse it, although he COULD 
refuse it. 
His will could not turn it into a weapon of attack, which is 
the inherent characteristic of all other defenses. 
The Atonement thus 
becomes the only defense which was NOT a two-edged sword. 
112 

T 2 B 43. 
The Atonement actually began long before the Crucifixion. 

Many Souls offered their efforts on behalf of the Separated Ones but 
they could not withstand the strength of the attack, and had to be 
brought back. 
Angels came, too, but their protection was not 
enough, because the Separated ones were not interested in peace. 

They had already split themselves, and were bent on dividing rather 
than reintegrating. 
The levels they introduced into themselves 
turned against each other, and they, in turn, turned against each 
other. 
They established differences, divisions, cleavages, dispersion, 
and all the other concepts related to the increasing splits they pro¬ 
duced. 


T 2 B 44. 
Not being in their Right Minds, they turned their defenses 
from protection to assault, and acted literally insanely. 
It was essen¬ 
tial to introduce a split-proof device which could be used ONLY to 
heal, if it was used at all. 
T(8l) 81 

T 2 B 45. 
The 113 Atonement was built into the space-time belief in or¬ 
der to set a limit on the need for the belief, and ultimately to make 
learning complete. 
The Atonement IS the final lesson. 
Learning it- 


11 Psalm 149:6 Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, And a two-edged sword in their hand, 
113 11/13 


1-74 


84 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


self, like the classrooms in which it occurs, is temporary. 
Let all 
those who overestimate human intelligence remember this. 
(HS 
questions last sentence, which she perceives as threatening.) The 
ability to learn has no value when change of understanding is no 
longer necessary. 
The eternally creative have nothing to learn. 
Only 
after the Separation was it necessary to direct the creative force to 
learning, because changed behavior had become mandatory. 


T 2 B 46. 
Human beings can learn to improve their behavior, and can 
also learn to become better and better learners. 
This increase serves 
(HS notes that this was written "served") to bring them in closer and 
closer accord with the Sonship. 
But the Sonship itself is a perfect 
creation, and perfection is not a matter of degree. 
Only while there 
are different degrees is learning meaningful. 
The evolution of man is 
merely a process by which he proceeds from one degree to the next. 

He corrects his previous missteps by stepping forward. 
This repre¬ 
sents a process which is actually incomprehensible in temporal 
terms, because he RETURNS as he progresses. 
(Originally, was 
"goes forward", rather than "progresses") 

T 2 B 47. 
The Atonement is the device by which he can free himself 
from the past as he goes ahead. 
It UNDOES his past errors, thus 
making it unnecessary for him to keep retracing his steps without 
advancing toward his return. 


T 2 B 48. 
In this sense, the Atonement saves time, but, like the miracle 
which serves it, does not abolish it. 
As long as there is need for 
Atonement, there is need for time. 
But the Atonement, as a com¬ 
pleted plan, does have a unique relationship TO time. 
Until the 
Atonement is finished, its various phases will proceed IN time, but 
the whole Atonement stands at its end. 
At this point, the bridge of 
the return has been built. 


T 2 B 49. 
(Note to HS. 
The reason this is upsetting you is because the 
Atonement is a TOTAL commitment. 
You still think this is associ¬ 
ated with loss. 
This is the same mistake ALL the Separated ones 
make, in one way or another. 
They cannot believe that a defense 
which CANNOT attack also IS the best defense. 
Except for this mis- 


85 


1-75 


Volume I Text 


perception, the angels COULD have helped them. 
What do you 
think "the T(82) 82 meek shall inherit the earth" MEANS ? They will 
literally take it over because of their strength. 
A two-way defense is 
inherently weak, precisely BECAUSE it has two edges it can turn 
against the self very unexpectedly. 
This tendency CANNOT be con¬ 
trolled EXCEPT by miracles.) 

T 2 B 50. 
The miracle turns the defense of Atonement to the protection 
of the inner self, which, as it becomes more and more secure; as¬ 
sumes its natural talent of protecting others. 
The inner self knows 
itself as both a brother AND a son. 


T 2 B 51. 
(The above notes were taken with great difficulty by HS, and 
constitute the only series thus far that were written very slowly. 

When HS asked about this, she was told, "don't worry about the 
notes. 
They are right, but YOU are not sufficiently Right-Minded yet 
to write about the Atonement with comfort. 
You will write about it 
yet with joy.) 

T 2 B 52. 
(Aside from HS: Last night I felt briefly but intensely de¬ 
pressed, temporarily under the impression that I was abandoned. 
I 
tried, but couldn't get through at all. 
After a while, I decided to give 
up for the time being, and He said, "don’t worry. 
I will never leave 
you or forsake you." I did feel a little better, and decided I was 
really not sick, so I could return to my exercises. 
While I was exercis¬ 
ing, I had some part-vision experiences which I found only mildly 
frightening at times, and quite reassuring at others. 


T 2 B 53.1 am not too sure of the sequence, but it began with a VERY 
clear assurance of love, and an equally clear emphasis on my own 
great value, beauty, and purity. 
Things got a little confusing after 
that. 
First, the idea of "Bride of Christ" occurred to me with vaguely 
inappropriate "undertones." Then there was a repetition of "the 
way of Love", and a restatement of an earlier experience, now as if it 
were FROM Him TO me: "Behold the Handmaid of the Lord; Be it 


1-76 


86 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


done unto you according to His Word." 114 (This threw me into panic 
before, but at that time, it was stated in the more accurate Biblical 
phrasing: "Be it done unto ME according to HIS Word.") 115 T(83) 83 
This time I was a bit uneasy, but remembered I had misperceived it 
last time, and was probably still not seeing it right. 
Actually, it is 
really just a statement of allegiance to the Divine Service, which can 
hardly be dangerous. 


T 2 B 54. 
Then there was a strange sequence, in which Christ seemed 
to be making very obvious advances, which became quite sexual in 
my perception of them. 
I ALMOST thought briefly that he turned 
into a devil. 
I got just a LITTLE scared, and the possession idea came 
in for a while, but I thought it SO silly, that there is no point in tak¬ 
ing it seriously. 


T 2 B 55. 
(As I am writing this, I remember that thing in the book 
about the demon lover, which once THROUGH me (note spelling, 
"threw") into a fit. 
I am upset, but the spelling slip is reassuring. 


T 2 B 56. 
This morning we reviewed the whole episode. 
He said he 
was "VERY pleased at the COMPARATIVE lack of fear, and also the 
concomitant awareness that it WAS misperception. 
This showed 
much greater strength, and a much increased Right-Mindedness. 

This is because defenses are now being used much better, on behalf 
of truth MORE than error, though not completely so. 


T 2 B 57. 
The weaker use of mis-projection is shown by my recogni¬ 
tion that it can't REALLY be that way, which became possible as 
soon as denial was applied against error, NOT truth. 
This permitted 
a much greater awareness of alternative interpretations. 


T 2 B 58. 
It was also explained (the shift to the passive form instead of 
"He also explained" should be noted. 
This is an expression of fear.) 
"Remember the section in "Letters from the Scattered Brotherhood" 


114 Luke 1:38 And Mary said, “Behold, the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. 

And the angel departed from her.” 

115 Apparently Schucman is referring to the same quote (Luke 1:18) The closing bracket is not in the 
Urtext manuscript but is in the Notes. 



87 


1-77 





Volume I Text 


you read last evening about 'Hold fast', and please do so.") T(84) 83a 
(NOTE) 

T 2 B 59. 
(Note made on 11/15 by HS re B's remark concerningll6 top 
of p.5,11/13.117) 

Yes, but I doubt if it says this is inevitable. 
It may entail more mis- 
will than we think. 
The above may have been too passively inter¬ 
preted. 
Note that B. 
Did NOT ask MY will re same. 
If he had, HE 
would have felt better. 
T(85) 84 118 

T 2 B 60. 
You know that when defenses are disrupted there is a period 
of real disorientation, accompanied by fear, guilt, and usually vacil¬ 
lations between anxiety and depression. 
This process is different 
only in that defenses are not being disrupted, but re-interpreted, 
even though it may be experienced as the same thing. 


T 2 B 61. 
In the re-interpretation of defenses, they are not disrupted 
but their use for ATTACK is lost. 
Since this means they can be used 
only ONE way, they became MUCH stronger, and much more de¬ 
pendable. 
They no longer oppose the Atonement, but greatly facili¬ 
tate it. 
The Atonement can only be accepted within you. 


T 2 B 62. 
You have perceived it largely as EXTERNAL thus far, and 
that is why your EXPERIENCE of it has been minimal. 
You have 
been SHOWN the chalice many times, but have not accepted it "for 
yourself." Your major improper use of defenses is now largely lim¬ 
ited to externalization. 
Do not fail to appreciate your own remark¬ 
able progress in this respect. 
You perceived it first as a vessel of 
some sort whose purpose was uncertain but which might be a piss- 
pot. 
You DID notice, however, that the INSIDE was gold, while the 
OUTSIDE, though shiny, was silver. 
This was a recognition of the 
fact that the INNER part is more precious than the OUTER side, 
even though both are resplendent, though with different value. 


T 2 B 63. 
The re-interpretation of defenses is essential to break open 
the INNER light. 
Since the Separation, man's defenses have been 

116 Urtext manuscript says “aconceming” here. 


117 This would refer to the next page, or absolute page #85 

118 11/13 


1-78 


88 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


used almost entirely to defend themselves AGAINST the Atone¬ 
ment, and thus maintain their separation. 
They generally see this as 
a need to protect the body from external intrusion (or intruding), 
and this kind of misperception is largely responsible for the homo¬ 
sexual fallacy, as well as your own pregnancy fears. 
The so-called 
"anal" behavior is a distorted attempt to "steal" the Atonement, and 
deny its worth by concealing it, and holding onto it with a bodily 
receptacle, which is regarded as particularly vicious. 
"Oral" fanta¬ 
sies are rather similar in purpose, except that they stem more from a 
sense of deprivation, and insatiable thirst which results. 
"Anal" fal¬ 
lacies are more of a refusal to give, while oral fantasies emphasize a 
distorted need to take. 
The main T(86) -85 error in both is the belief 
that the body can be used as a means for attaining Atonement. 


T 2 B 64. 
Perceiving the body as the Temple is only the first step in 
correcting this kind of distortion. 
(HS scalded hand, and looked for 
butter to put on. 
It occurred to her that the Atonement was the cure. 

Burn appeared to be minimal, and caused little discomfort.) 

T 2 B 65. 
Seeing the body as the Temple alters part of the mispercep¬ 
tion, but not all of it. 
It DOES recognize, however, that the concept 
of addition or subtraction in PHYSICAL terms is not appropriate. 

But the next step is to realize that a Temple is not a building at all. 


Its REAL holiness lies in the INNER altar, around which the build¬ 
ing is built. 
The inappropriate emphasis which men have put on 
beautiful Church BUILDINGS is a sign of their own fear of Atone¬ 
ment, and unwillingness to reach the altar itself. 
The REAL beauty 
of the Temple cannot be seen with the physical eye. 
The spiritual 
eye, on the other hand, cannot see the building at all, but it perceives 
the altar within with perfect clarity. 
This is because the spiritual eye 
has perfect vision. 


T 2 B 66. 
For perfect effectiveness, the chalice of the Atonement be¬ 
longs at the center of the inner altar, where it undoes the Separation, 
and restores the wholeness of the Spirit. 
Before the Separation, the 
mind was invulnerable to fear, because fear did not exist. 
Both the 
Separation and the fear were MISCREATIONS of the mind, which 


89 


1-79 


Volume I Text 


have to be undone. 
This is what the Bible means by the "Restoration 
of the Temple." It DOES NOT mean the restoration of the building, 
but it DOES mean the opening of the altar to receive the Atonement. 

T 2 B 67. 
This heals the Separation, and places within man the one 
defense against all Separation-mind errors which can make him per¬ 
fectly invulnerable. 
T(87) -86 

T 2 B 68. 
The acceptance of the Atonement by everyone is only a mat¬ 
ter of time. 
In fact, both TIME and MATTER were created for this 
purpose. 
This appears to contradict free will, because of the inevita¬ 
bility of this decision. 
If you review the idea carefully, you will real¬ 
ize that this is not true. 
Everything is limited in some way by the 
manner of its creation. 
Free will can temporize, and is capable of 
enormous procrastination. 
But it cannot depart entirely from its 
Creator, who set the limits on its ability to miscreate by virtue of its 
own real purpose. 


T 2 B 69. 
The misuse of will engenders a situation which, in the ex¬ 
treme, becomes altogether intolerable. 
Pain thresholds can be high, 
but they are not limitless. 
Eventually, everybody begins to recog¬ 
nize, however dimly, that there MUST be a better way. 
As this rec¬ 
ognition is more firmly established, it becomes a perceptual turning- 
point. 
This ultimately reawakens the spiritual eye, simultaneously 
weakening the investment in physical sight. 
The alternating invest¬ 
ment in the two types or levels of perception is usually experienced 
as conflict for a long time, and can become very acute. 


T 2 B 70. 
But the outcome is as certain as God. 
The spiritual eye liter¬ 
ally CANNOT SEE error, and merely looks for Atonement. 
All the 
solutions which the physical eyes seek, dissolve in its sight. 
The 
spiritual eye, which looks within, recognizes immediately that the 
altar has been defiled, and needs to be repaired and protected. 
Per¬ 
fectly aware of the RIGHT defense, it passes over all others, looking 
past error to truth. 
Because of the real strength of ITS vision, it pulls 
the will into its own service, and forces the mind to concur. 
This re¬ 
establishes the true power of the will, and makes it increasingly un¬ 
able to tolerate delay. 
The mind then realizes, with increasing certi- 


1-80 


90 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


tude, that delay is only a way of increasing unnecessary pain, which 
it need not tolerate at all. 
The pain threshold drops accordingly, and 
the mind becomes increasingly sensitive to what it would once have 
regarded as very minor intrusions of discomfort. 
T(88) -87 

T 2 B 71. 
The Children of God are entitled to perfect comfort, which 
comes from a sense of perfect trust. 
Until they achieve this, they 
waste themselves and their true creative power on useless attempts 
to make themselves more comfortable by inappropriate means. 
But 
the real means is ALREADY provided, and does not involve any 
efforts on their part at all. 
Their egocentricity usually misperceives 
this as personally insulting, an interpretation which obviously arises 
from their misperception of themselves. 
Egocentricity and commun¬ 
ion cannot coexist. 
Even the terms themselves are contradictory. 


T 2 B 72. 
The Atonement is the only gift which is worthy of being of¬ 
fered to the Altar of God. 
This is because of the inestimable value of 
the Altar itself. 
It was created perfect, and is entirely worthy of re¬ 
ceiving perfection. 
God IS lonely without His SOULS, and THEY are 
lonely without Him. 
Remember the "spiritual" (a VERY good term) 
which begins with "And God stepped down from Heaven and said: 
I'M lonely - - I'll make ME a World." The world WAS a way of heal¬ 
ing the Separation, and the Atonement is the GUARANTEE that the 
device will ultimately do so. 


T 2 B 73. 
(HS request for special message for B. 
Tell B that his delaying 
tactics are holding him back. 
He does not really understand de¬ 
tachment, distantiation, and withdrawal. 
He is interpreting them as 
"holding himself aloof" from the Atonement.) T(89) -88 119 

T 2 C. 
Healing as Release from Fear (Notes 263 5:112) 

T 2 c l. 
The new emphasis will now be on healing. 
The miracle is the 
means, the Atonement the principle, and the healing is the result. 

Those who speak of "the miracle OF healing" are combining two 
orders of reality inappropriately. 
Healing is NOT a miracle. 
The 


119 Nov. 
14 


91 


1-81 



Volume I Text 


Atonement, or the final miracle, is a REMEDY. 
It is purely a means, 
while any type of healing is a result. 


T 2 C 2. 
The order of error to which Atonement is applied is irrele¬ 
vant. 
Essentially, ALL healing is the release from fear. 
But to under¬ 
take this you cannot be fearful yourself. 


T 2 C 3. 
You do not understand healing because of your own fear. 
I 
have been hinting throughout (and once stated very directly, be¬ 
cause you were unfearful at the time) that you MUST heal others. 

The reason is that their healing merely witnesses or attests to yours. 

T 2 C 4. 
A major step in the Atonement plan is to undo error at ALL 
levels. 
Illness, which is really "not Right Mindedness", is the result 
of level confusion in the sense that it always entails the misbelief 
that what is amiss in one level can adversely affect another. 


T 2 c 5. 
We have constantly referred to miracles as the means of cor¬ 
recting level confusion. 
In reality, all mistakes must be corrected at 
the level at which they occur. 
Only the mind is capable of error. 
The 
body can ACT erroneously, but this is only because it has responded 
to mis-Thought. 
The body cannot create, and the belief that it CAN, 
a fundamental error responsible for most of the fallacies already re¬ 
ferred to, produces all physical symptoms. 


T 2 c 6. 
All physical illness represents a belief in magic. 
The whole 
distortion which created magic rested on the belief that there is a 
creative ability in matter, which can control the mind. 
This fallacy 
can work either way; i.e., it can be misbelieved either that the mind 
can miscreate IN the body, or that the body can miscreate in the 
mind. 
If it can be made clear T(90) -89 that the mind, which is the only 
level of creation, cannot create beyond itself, then neither confusion 
need occur. 


T 2 C 7. 
The reason why only the mind can create is more obvious 
than may be immediately apparent. 
The Soul has been created. 
The 
body is a learning device FOR the mind. 
Learning devices are not 
lessons in themselves. 
Their purpose is merely to facilitate the 
THINKING of the learner. 
The most that a faulty use of a learning 


1-82 


92 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


device can do is to fail to facilitate. 
It does not have the power in it¬ 
self to introduce actual learning errors. 


T 2 C 8. 
The body, if properly understood, shares the invulnerability 
of the Atonement to two-edged application. 
This is not because the 
body is a miracle, but because it is not inherently open to misinter¬ 
pretation. 
The body is merely a fact. 
120 Its ABILITIES can be, 121 and 
frequently are, overevaluated. 
However, it is almost impossible to 
deny its existence. 
Those who do are engaging in a particularly un¬ 
worthy form of denial. 
(The use of the word "unworthy" here im¬ 
plies simply that it is not necessary to protect the mind by denying 
the un-mindful. 
There is little doubt that the mind can miscreate. 
If 
one denies this unfortunate aspect of its power, one is also denying 
the power itself.) 

T 2 C 9. 
All material means which man accepts as remedies for bodily 
ills are simply restatements of magic principles. 
It was the first level 
of the error to believe that the body created its own illness. 
Thereaf¬ 
ter, it is a second mis-step to attempt to heal it through non-creative 
agents. 
It does not follow, however, that the application of these 
very weak corrective devices are evil. 
Sometimes the illness has suf¬ 
ficiently great a hold over an individual's mind to render him inac¬ 
cessible to Atonement. 
In this case, one may be wise to utilize a com¬ 
promise approach to mind and body, in which something from the 
OUTSIDE is temporarily given healing T(9l) -90 belief. 
This is because 
the last thing that can help the non-Right-Minded (or the sick) is an 
increase in fear. 
They are already in a fear-weakened state. 
If they 
are inappropriately exposed to a straight and undiluted miracle, 
they may be precipitated into panic. 
This is particularly likely to oc¬ 
cur when upside down perception has induced the belief that mira¬ 
cles are frightening. 


T 2 C 10. 
The value of the Atonement does not lie in the manner in 
which it is expressed. 
In fact, if it is truly used it will inevitably BE 

120 The words “in human experience” are added in the HLC. 
This has not been located in the Notes. 


121 The word “be” is not present in the original Urtext manuscript, but is present in the HLC. 
This has 
not been located in the Notes. 



93 


1-83 



Volume I Text 


expressed in whatever way is most helpful to the receiver, not the 
giver. 
This means that a miracle, to attain its full efficacy, MUST be 
expressed in a language which the recipient can understand without 
fear. 
It does not follow by any means that this is the highest level of 
communication of which he is capable. 
But it DOES mean that it is 
the highest level of communication of which he is capable NOW. 


T 2 c 11. 
The whole aim of the miracle is to RAISE the level of com¬ 
munication, not to impose regression (as improperly used) upon it. 

Before it is safe to let miracle workers loose in this world, it is essen¬ 
tial that they understand fully the fear of release. 
Otherwise, they 
may unwittingly foster the misbelief that release is imprisonment, 
which is very prevalent. 
This misperception arose from the at¬ 
tempted protection device (or misdefense) that harm can be limited 
to the body. 
This was because of the much greater fear (which this 
one counteracts) that the mind can hurt itself. 
Neither error is really 
meaningful, because the miscreations of the mind do not really exist. 

That recognition is a far better protection device than any form of 
level confusion, because of the advantages of introducing correction 
at the level of the error. 


T 2 c 12. 
It is essential that the remembrance of the fact that ONLY 
mind can create at all remain with you. 
Implicit in this is the corol¬ 
lary that correction belongs at the thought level, and NOT at either 
level T(92) -91 to which creation is inapplicable. 
To repeat an earlier 
statement, and also to extend it somewhat, the Soul is already per¬ 
fect, and therefore does not require correction. 
The body does not 
really exist, except as a learning device for the mind. 
This learning 
device is not subject to errors of its own, because it was created, but 
is NOT creating. 
It should be obvious, then, that correcting the crea¬ 
tor (or inducing it to give up miscreation) is the only application of 
creation which is inherently meaningful at all. 


T 2 c 13. 
We said before that magic is essentially mindless, or the de¬ 
structive (miscreated) use of mind. 
Physical medicines are a form of 
"spells." In one way, they are a more benign form, in that they do 
not entail the possession fallacy which DOES enter when a mind 


1-84 


94 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


believes that it can possess another. 
Since this is considerably less 
dangerous, though still incorrect, it has its advantages. 
It is particu¬ 
larly helpful to the therapist who really wants to heal, but is still 
fearful himself. 
By using physical means to do so, he is not engaging 
in any form of enslavement, even though he is not applying the 
Atonement. 
This means that his mind is dulled by fear, but is not 
actively engaged in distortion. 


T 2 C 14. 
Those who are afraid of using the mind to heal are right in 
avoiding it, because the very fact that they are afraid HAS made 
them vulnerable to miscreation. 
They are therefore likely to misun¬ 
derstand any healing they might induce, and, because egocentricity 
and fear usually occur together, may be unable to accept the real 
Source of the healing. 
Under these conditions, it is safer for them to 
rely TEMPORARILY on physical healing devices, because they can¬ 
not misperceive them as their own creations. 
As long as their own 
vulnerability persists, it is essential to preserve them from even at¬ 
tempting miracles. 


T 2 C 15. 
We said in a previous section that the miracle is an expres¬ 
sion of miracle-Mindedness. 
Miracle-Mindedness merely means 
Right-Mindedness in the sense that we are now using it. 
Right- 
Mindedness neither exalts nor depreciates T(93) -92 the mind of the 
miracle worker nor of the miracle receiver. 
However, as a creative 
act, the miracle need not await the Right-Mindedness of the receiver. 

In fact, its purpose is to restore him TO his Right Mind. 
But it is es¬ 
sential that the miracle worker be in his Right Mind, or he will be 
unable to reestablish Right-Mindedness in someone else. 


T 2 C 16. 
The healer who relies on his own readiness is endangering 
his understanding. 
He is perfectly safe as long as he is completely 
unconcerned about HIS readiness, but maintains a consistent trust 
in MINE. 
(Errors of this kind produce some very erratic behavior, 
which usually point up an underlying unwillingness to co-operate. 

Note that by inserting the carbon backwards, B. 
created a situation 
in which two copies did not exist. 
This reflected two levels of confi¬ 
dence lack, one in My readiness to heal, and the other in his own 


95 


1-85 


Volume I Text 


willingness to give.) These errors inevitably introduce inefficiency 
into the miracle worker's behavior, and temporarily disrupt his 
miracle-mindedness. 
We might also make very similar comments 
about your own hesitation about dictating at all. 
This is a larger er¬ 
ror only because it results in greater inefficiency. 
If you don't say 
anything, nobody can use it, including Me. 
We have established that 
for all corrective processes, the first step is know that this is fear. 

Unless fear had entered, the corrective procedure would never have 
become necessary. 
If your miracle working propensities are not 
working, it is always because fear has intruded on your Right- 
Mindedness, and has literally upset it (i.e. 
turned it upside down). 


T 2 c 17. 
All forms of not-Right-Mindedness are the result of refusal 
to accept the Atonement FOR YOURSELF. 
If the miracle worker 
DOES accept it, he places himself in the position to recognize that 
those who need to be healed are simply those who have NOT done 
so. 
The reason why you felt the vast radiation range of your own 
inner illumination is because you were aware that your Right- 
Mindedness IS healing. 
T(94) -93 The sole responsibility of the miracle 
worker is to accept Atonement himself. 
This means that he knows 
that mind is the only creative level, and that its errors ARE healed 
by the Atonement. 
Once he accepts this, HIS mind can only heal. 
By 
denying his mind any destructive potential, and reinstating its 
purely constructive powers, he has placed himself in a position 
where he can undo the level confusion of others. 
The message which 
he then gives to others is the truth that TH E IR MINDS are really 
similarly constructive, and that their own miscreations cannot hurt 
them. 
By affirming this, the miracle worker releases the mind from 
overevaluating its own learning device (the body), and restores the 
mind to its true position as the learner. 
It should be re-emphasized 
that the body does not learn, any more than it creates. 
As a learning 
device, it merely follows the learner, but if it is falsely endowed with 
self initiative, it becomes a serious obstruction to the learning it 
should facilitate. 



1-86 


96 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


T 2 C 18. 
ONLY the mind is capable of illumination. 
The Soul is al¬ 
ready illuminated, and the body in itself is too dense. 
The mind, 
however, can BRING its own illumination TO the body by recogniz¬ 
ing that density is the opposite of intelligence, and therefore una¬ 
menable to independent learning. 
It is, however, easily brought into 
alignment with a mind which has learned to look beyond density 
toward light. 


T 2 c 19. 
Corrective learning always begins with awakening the spiri¬ 
tual eye, and turning away from belief in physical sight. 
The reason 
this entails fear is because man is afraid of what his spiritual eye will 
see, which was why he closed it in the first place. 
We said before 
that the spiritual eye cannot see error, and is capable only of looking 
beyond it to the defense of Atonement. 
There is no doubt that the 
spiritual eye does produce extreme discomfort by what it sees. 
The 
thing that man forgets is that the discomfort T(95) -94 is not the final 
outcome of its perception. 
When the spiritual eye is permitted to 
look upon the defilement of the altar, it also looks immediately to¬ 
ward Atonement. 
Nothing which the spiritual eye perceives can in¬ 
duce fear. 
Everything that results from accurate spiritual awareness 
merely is channelized toward correction. 
Discomfort is aroused only 
to bring the need to correct forcibly into awareness. 


T 2 c 20. 
What the physical eye sees is not corrective, nor can it be 
corrected by any device which can be physically seen. 
As long as a 
man believes in what his physical sight tells him, all his corrective 
behavior will be misdirected. 
The reason why the real vision is ob¬ 
scured is because man cannot endure to see his own defiled altar. 


But since the altar has BEEN defiled, this fact becomes doubly dan¬ 
gerous unless it IS perceived. 
This perception is totally non¬ 
threatening because of the Atonement. 
The fear of healing arises in 
the end from an unwillingness to accept the unequivocal fact that 
healing is necessary. 
The fear arises because of the necessary will¬ 
ingness to look at what man has done to himself. 


T 2 c 21. 
Healing was an ability which was lent to man after the Sepa¬ 
ration, before which it was completely unnecessary. 
Like all aspects 


97 


1-87 


Volume I Text 


of the space-time belief, healing ability is temporary. 
However, as 
long as time persists, healing remains among the stronger human 
protections. 
This is because healing always rests on charity, and 
charity is a way of perceiving the true perfection of another, even if 
he cannot perceive it himself. 
Most of the loftier concepts of which 
man is capable now are time-dependent. 
Charity is really a weaker 
reflection of a much more powerful love-encompassment, which is 
far beyond any form of charity that man can conceive of as yet. 

Charity is essential to Right-Mindedness, in the limited sense to 
which Right-Mindedness can now be attained. 
Charity is a way of 
looking at another AS IF he had already gone far beyond his actual 
accomplishment in time. 
Since his own thinking is faulty, he cannot 
see the Atonement himself, or he would have no need for charity at 
all. 
The charity which is accorded him is both an acknowledgment 
that he IS weak, and a recognition that he COULD BE stronger. 
The 
way in which both of these beliefs are stated clearly implies their 
dependence on time, making it quite apparent that charity lies 
within the framework of human T(96) 95 limitations, though toward 
the higher levels. 


T 2 c 22. 
We said before, twice in fact, that only Revelation transcends 
time. 
The miracle, as an expression of true human charity, can only 
shorten it a best. 
It must be understood, however, that whenever a 
man offers a miracle to another, he IS shortening the suffering of 
both. 
This introduces a correction into the Record, which corrects 
retroactively as well as progressively. 
T(97) -96 122 

T 2 D, Fear as Lack of Love (Notes 265 5:114) 

T 2 D 1 . 
You and B. 
both believe that "being afraid" is involuntary. 

But I have told you many times that only CONSTRUCTIVE acts 
should be involuntary. 
We said that Christ-control can take over 
everything that DOESN'T matter, and Christ-guidance can direct 
everything that DOES, if you so will. 



122 Nov. 
15, ‘65 


1-88 


98 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


T 2 D 2. 
Fear cannot be Christ-controlled, but it CAN be self- 
controlled. 
Fear is always associated with what does not matter. 
It 
prevents Me from controlling it. 
The correction is therefore a matter 
of YOUR will, because its presence shows that you have raised the 
UNIMPORTANT to a higher level than it warrants. 
You have thus 
brought it under your will, where it DOES NOT belong. 
This means 
YOU feel responsible for it. 
The level confusion here is perfectly ob¬ 
vious. 


T 2 D 3. 
The reason that I cannot CONTROL fear for you is that you 
are attempting to raise to the mind level the proper content of the 
lower-order reality. 
I do NOT foster level confusion, but YOU can 
will to correct it. 


T 2 D 4. 
You would not tolerate insane behavior on your part, and 
would hardly advance the excuse that you could not help it. 
Why 
should you tolerate insane thinking? There is a fallacy here you 
would do well to look at clearly. 


T 2 D 5. 
You both believe that you ARE responsible for what you DO, 
but NOT for what you TF1INK. 
The truth is that you ARE responsi¬ 
ble for what you THINK, because it is only at this level that you 
CAN exercise choice. 
What you DO comes from what you think. 

You cannot separate the truth by giving autonomy to your behavior. 

This is controlled by Me automatically, as soon as you place what 
you think under my guidance. 


T 2 D 6. 
Whenever you are afraid, it is a sure sign that you have al¬ 
lowed your mind to miscreate, i.e., have NOT allowed Me to guide 
it. 
It is pointless to believe that controlling the outcome of mis- 
Thought T(98) -97 can result in real healing. 
When you are fearful, 
you have willed wrongly. 
This is why you feel you are responsible 
for it. 


T 2 D 7. 
You must change your MIND, not your behavior, and this IS 
a matter of will. 
You do not need guidance EXCEPT at the mind- 
level. 
Correction belongs ONLY at the level where creation is possi¬ 
ble. 
The term does not really mean anything at the symptom-level, 
where it cannot work. 



99 


1-89 


Volume I Text 


T 2 D 8. 
The correction of fear IS your responsibility. 
When you ask 
for release from fear, you are implying that it isn't. 
You should ask, 
instead, for help in the conditions which have brought the fear 
about. 
This condition always entails a separated Mind-willingness. 

At this level, you CAN help it. 


T 2 D 9. 
You are much too tolerant of Mind-wandering, thus pas¬ 
sively condoning its miscreation. 
The particular result never mat¬ 
ters, but this fundamental error DOES. 
The fundamental correction 
is always the same. 
Before you will to do anything, ask Me if your 
will is in accord with Mine. 
If you are sure that it IS, there will BE no 
fear. 


T 2 D to. 
Fear is always a sign of strain, which arises whenever the 
WILL to do conflicts with WHAT you do. 
This situation arises in 
two major ways: 

1) You can will to do conflicting things, either simultaneously or 
successively. 
This produces conflicting behavior, which would be 
tolerable to the self (though not necessarily to others) except for the 
fact that the part of the will that wants something ELSE is outraged. 


2) You can BEHAVE as you think you should, but without entirely 
WILLING to do so. 
This produces consistent behavior, but entails 
great strain WITHIN the self. 
T(99) -98 

T 2 D 11. 
If you think about it, you will realize that in both cases the 
will and the behavior are out-of-accord, resulting in a situation in 
which you are doing what you do NOT will. 
This arouses a sense of 
coercion, which usually produces rage. 
The anger then invades the 
mind, and projection in the wrong sense becomes likely. 
Depression 
or anxiety are virtually certain. 


T 2 D 12. 
Remember that whenever there is fear, it is because YOU 
have NOT MADE UP YOUR MIND. 
Your will is split, and your be¬ 
havior inevitably becomes erratic. 
Correcting at the behavior level 
can shift the error from the first type to the second, but will NOT 
obliterate the fear. 



1-90 


100 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


T 2 D 13. 
It is possible to reach a state in which you bring your will 
under my guidance without much conscious effort, but this implies 
the kind of habit pattern which neither you nor B. 
has developed 
dependably as yet. 


T 2 D 14. 
Tell B. 
that although he keeps telling you that God will 
never ask you to do more than you can, he does not understand it 
himself. 
God CANNOT ask more than you WILL. 
The strength to 
DO comes from your own undivided will to do. 
There is NO strain 
in doing God's will as soon as it is also your own. 


T 2 D 15. 
The lesson here is quite simple, but particularly apt to be 
overlooked. 
I will therefore repeat it, URGING you to listen. 
Only 
your mind can produce fear. 
It does so whenever it is conflicted in 
what it wills, thus producing inevitable strain, because willing and 
doing become discordant. 
This CANNOT be corrected by better 
DOING. 
But it CAN be corrected by higher WILLING. 


T 2 E. 
The Correction for Lack of Love (Notes 271 T(5:120) 

T 2 E 1 . 
After taking the first corrective step, i.e., "Knowing it IS fear," 
you might benefit temporarily by adding another next step BEFORE 
going on with the corrective process. 
Try saying to yourself that you 
MUST have willed not to love somehow or somewhere, or that fear 
which arises from behavior-will conflict could not have happened. 

Then follow previous instructions. 
T(100) -99 

T 2 E 2. 
If you consider what the process really means, it is nothing 
more than a series of pragmatic steps in the larger process of accept¬ 
ing the Atonement as THE remedy. 
From this viewpoint, the steps 
can be reworded as follows: 

1. 
) Know first this is fear. 


2. 
) Fear arises from lack of love. 


3. 
) The ONLY remedy for lack of love is perfect love. 


4. 
) Perfect love IS the Atonement. 


T 2 E 3. 
The final procedural step (3) is inherent in the last statement 
(4). 
We have emphasized that the miracle, or the EXPRESSION of 


101 


1-91 


Volume I Text 


Atonement, is always a sign of real respect from the worthy TO the 
worthy. 
This worth IS re-established by the Atonement. 


T 2 E 4. 
It is obvious, then, that when you are afraid you have placed 
yourself in a position where you NEED Atonement BECAUSE you 
have DONE something loveless because you WILLED without love. 

This is precisely the situation for which the Atonement was offered. 

The need for the remedy inspired its CREATION. 


T 2 E 5. 
As long as you recognize only the NEED for the remedy, you 
will remain fearful. 
However, as soon as you REMEDY it, you have 
also abolished the fear. 
This is how TRUE healing occurs. 
T(ioi) -100 

T 2 E 6. 
Everyone experiences fear, and nobody enjoys it. 
Yet, it 
would take very little Right-thinking to know why it occurs. 
Neither 
you nor B. 
have thought about it very much, either. 
(I object at this 
point to the use of plural verb with a properly singular subject - - HS 
- - and remember that last time in a very similar sentence. 
He said it 
correctly and I remembered it with real pleasure. 
This real gram¬ 
matical error makes me suspicious of the genuineness of these notes. 

ANSWER : What it really shows is that YOU are not very receptive. 

The reason it came out that way, is because you are projecting (in 
the inappropriate way) your own anger, which has nothing to do 
with these notes. 
YOU made the error, because you are not feeling 
loving, so you want me to sound silly, so you won't have to pay at¬ 
tention. 
Actually, I am trying to get through against considerable 
opposition, because you are not very happy, and I wish you were. 
I 
thought I'd take a chance, even though you are so resistant, because 
I MIGHT be able to make you feel better. 
You may be unable not to 
attack at all, but do try to listen a little, too.) 

T 2 E 7. 
Very few people appreciate the real power of the mind. 
No¬ 
body remains fully aware of it all the time. 
This is inevitable in this 
world, because the human being has many things he must do, and 
cannot engage in constant thought-watching. 
However, if he hopes 
to spare himself from fear, there are some things he must realize, 
and realize them fully, at least some of the time. 
T(l02) -101 


1-92 


102 



Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


T 2 E 8. 
The mind is a very powerful creator, and it never loses its 
creative force. 
It never sleeps. 
Every instant it is creating, and AL¬ 
WAYS as you will. 
Many of your ordinary expressions reflect this. 

For example, when you say "don't give it a thought", you are imply¬ 
ing that if you do not think about something, it will have no effect 
on you. 
This is true enough. 


T 2 E 9. 
On the other hand, many other expressions are clear expres¬ 
sions of the prevailing LACK of awareness of thought-power. 
For 
example, you say, "just an idle thought", and mean that the thought 
has no effect. 
You also speak of some actions as "thoughtless", im¬ 
plying that if the person HAD thought, he would not have behaved 
as he did. 
You also use phrases like "thought provoking", which is 
bland enough, but the term "a provoking thought" means some¬ 
thing quite different. 


T 2 E 10. 
While expressions like "think big" give some recognition to 
the power of thought, they still come nowhere near the truth. 
You 
do not expect to grow when you say it, because you don’t really be¬ 
lieve it. 
It is hard to recognize that thought and belief combine into a 
power-surge that can literally move mountains. 
123 

T 2 E 11. 
It appears at first glance that to believe such power about 
yourself is merely arrogant, but that is not the real reason why you 
don’t believe it. 


T 2 E 12. 
People prefer to believe that their thoughts cannot exert real 
control because they are literally AFRAID of them. 
Therapists try to 
help people who are afraid of their own death wishes by depreciat¬ 
ing the power of the wish. 
They even attempt to "free" the patient 
by persuading him that he can think whatever he wants, without 
ANY real effect at all. 
T(l03) -102 


123 Matthew 17:20 So Jesus said to them, “Because of your unbelief; for assuredly, I say to you, if you 
have faith as a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move; 
and nothing will be impossible for you. 


1 Corinthians 13:2 And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all 
knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, but have not love, I am 
nothing. 



103 


1-93 



Volume I Text 


T 2 E 13. 
There is a real dilemma here, which only the truly right- 
minded can escape. 
Death wishes do not kill in the physical sense, 
but they DO kill spiritually. 
ALL destructive thinking is dangerous. 

Given a death wish, a man has no choice except to ACT upon his 
thought, or behave CONTRARY TO it. 
He can thus choose ONLY 
between homicide and fear. 
(See previous notes on will conflicts.) 
( NOTE I avoided this term in the last series of notes intentionally, 
because it seemed too Rankian. 
Apparently, there was a reason why 
this word should have been used last time. 
It is used in this section 
for a very good reason.) 

T 2 E 14. 
The other possibility is that he depreciates the power of his 
thought. 
This is the usual psychoanalytic approach. 
This DOES allay 
guilt, but at the cost of rendering thinking impotent. 
If you believe 
that what you think is ineffectual, you may cease to be overly afraid 
of it, but you are hardly likely to respect it, either. 
The world is full 
of endless examples of how man has depreciated himself because he 
is afraid of his own thoughts. 
In some forms of insanity, thoughts 
are glorified, but this is only because the underlying depreciation 
was too effective for tolerance. 


T 2 E 15. 
The truth is that there ARE no "idle thoughts." ALL thinking 
produces form at some level. 
The reason why people are afraid of 
ESP, and so often react against it, is because they KNOW that 
thought can hurt them. 
Their OWN thoughts have made them vul¬ 
nerable. 


T 2 E 16. 
You and B., who complain all the time about fear, still persist 
in creating it most of the time. 
I told you last time that you cannot 
ask ME to release you from it, because I KNOW it does not exist. 

YOU don't. 
If I merely intervene between your thoughts and their 
results, I would be tampering with a basic law of cause and effect, in 
fact the most fundamental one there is in this world. 
T(104) -103 1 
would hardly help if I depreciated the power of your own thinking. 

This would be in direct opposition to the purpose of this course. 


T 2 E 17. 
It is certainly much more useful to remind you that you do 
not guard your thoughts at all carefully, except for a relatively small 


1-94 


104 




Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


part of the day, and somewhat inconsistently even then. 
You may 
feel at this point that it would take a miracle to enable you to do 
this, which is perfectly true. 
Human beings are not used to miracu¬ 
lous thinking, but they CAN be TRAINED to think that way. 


T 2 E 18. 
All miracle-workers HAVE to be trained that way. 
I have to 
be able to count on them. 
This means that I cannot allow them to 
leave their mind unguarded, or they will not be able to help me. 

Miracle-working entails a full realization of the power of thought, 
and real avoidance of miscreation. 
Otherwise, the miracle will be 
necessary to set the mind ITSELF straight, a circular process which 
would hardly foster the time-collapse for which the miracle was in¬ 
tended. 
Nor would it induce the healthy respect that every miracle- 
worker must have for true cause and effect. 


T 2 E 19. 
Miracles cannot free the miracle-worker from fear. 
Both 
miracles AND fear come from his thoughts, and if he were not free 
to choose one, he would also not be free to choose the other. 
Re¬ 
member, we said before that when electing one person, you reject 
another. 


T 2 E 20. 
It is much the same in electing the miracle. 
By so doing, you 
HAVE rejected fear. 
Fear cannot assail unless it has been created. 

You and B. 
have been afraid of God, of me, of yourselves, and of 
practically everyone you know at one time or another. 
T(105) -104 This 
can only be because you have miscreated all of us, and believe in 
what you have created. 
(We spent a lot of time on this before, but it 
did not help very much.) You would never have done this if you 
were not afraid of your own thoughts. 
The vulnerable are essentially 
miscreators, because they misperceive Creation. 


T 2 E 21. 
You and B. 
are willing to accept primarily what does NOT 
change your minds too much, and leaves you free to leave them 
quite unguarded most of the time. 
You persist in believing that 
when you do not consciously watch your mind, it is unmindful. 


T 2 E 22. 
It is time to consider the whole world of the unconscious, or 
unwatched mind. 
This will frighten you, because it is the source of 
fright. 
You may look at it as a new theory of basic conflict, if you 


105 


1-95 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume I Text 


wish, which will not be entirely an intellectual approach, because I 
doubt if the truth will escape you entirely. 


T 2 E 23. 
The unwatched mind is responsible for the whole content of 
the unconscious, which lies above the miracle-level. 
All psychoana¬ 
lytic theorists have made some contribution to the truth in this con¬ 
nection, but none of them has seen it in its true entirety. 
(The correct 
grammar here is a sign of your better cooperation. 
Thank you.) 
Jung's best contribution was an awareness of individual vs. 
collec¬ 
tive unconscious levels. 
He also recognized the major place of the 
religious spirit in his schema. 
His archetypes were also meaningful 
concepts. 
But his major error lay in regarding the deepest level of 
the unconscious as shared in terms of CONTENT. 
The deepest level 
of the unconscious is shared as an ABILITY. 
As MIRACLE- 
MINDEDNESS, the content, (or the particular miracles which an in¬ 
dividual happens to perform) does not matter at all. 
T(l06) -105 They 
will, in fact, be entirely different, because, since I direct them, I make 
a point of avoiding redundancy. 
Unless a miracle actually heals, it is 
not a miracle at all. 


T 2 E 24. 
The content of the miracle-level is not recorded in the indi¬ 
vidual's unconscious, because if it were, it would not be automatic 
and involuntary, which we have said repeatedly it should be. 
How¬ 
ever, the content IS a matter for the record, which is NOT within the 
individual himself. 


T 2 E 25. 
All psychoanalysts made one common error, in that they at¬ 
tempted to uncover unconscious CONTENT. 
You cannot under¬ 
stand unconscious activity in these terms, because "content" is ap¬ 
plicable ONLY to the more superficial unconscious levels to which 
the individual himself contributes. 
This is the level at which he can 
readily introduce fear, and usually does. 


T 2 E 26. 
Freud was right in calling this level pre-conscious, and em¬ 
phasizing that there is a fairly easy interchange between precon- 
scious and conscious material. 
He was also right in regarding the 
censor as an agent for the protection of consciousness from fear. 
HIS 
major error lay in his insistence that this level is necessary at all in 


1-96 


106 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


the psychic structure. 
If the psyche contains fearful levels from 
which it cannot escape without splitting, its integration is perma¬ 
nently threatened. 
It is essential not to control the fearful, but to 
ELIMINATE it. 


T 2 E 27. 
Here, Rank's concept of the will was particularly good, ex¬ 
cept that he preferred to ally it only with man's own truly creative 
ability, but did not extend it to its proper union with God's. 
His 
"birth trauma", another valid idea, was also too limited, in that it 
did not refer to the Separation, which was really a FALSE idea of 
birth. 
Physical birth is not T(107) -106 a trauma in itself. 
It can, how¬ 
ever, remind the individual of the Separation, which was a very real 
cause of fear. 


T 2 E 28. 
The idea of "will-THERAPY" was potentially a very power¬ 
ful one, but Rank did not see its real potential because he himself 
used his mind partly to create a theory OF the mind, but also partly 
to attack Freud. 
His reactions to Freud stemmed from his own un¬ 
fortunate acceptance of the deprivation-fallacy, which itself arose 
from the Separation. 
This led him to believe that his own mind- 
creation could stand only if the creation of another's fell. 
In conse¬ 
quence, his theory emphasized rather than minimized the two- 
edged nature of defenses. 
This is an outstanding characteristic of his 
concepts, because it was outstandingly true of him. 


T 2 E 29. 
He also misinterpreted the birth-trauma in a way that made 
it inevitable for him to attempt a therapy whose goal was to ABOL¬ 
ISH FEAR. 
This is characteristic of all later theorists, who do not at¬ 
tempt, as Freud did, to split off the fear in his own form of therapy. 


T 2 E 30. 
No one as yet has fully recognized either the therapeutic 
value of fear, or the only way in which it can be truly ended. 
When 
man miscreates, he IS in pain. 
The cause and effect principle here is 
temporarily a real expeditor. 
Actually, Cause is a term properly be¬ 
longing to God, and Effect, which should also be capitalized, is HIS 
Sonship. 
This entails a set of cause and effect relationships which are 


107 


1-97 


Volume I Text 


totally different from those which man introduced into the Miscrea- 
tion.T(108) -107 124 

T 2 E 31. 
The fundamental opponents in the real basic conflict are 
Creation and miscreation. 
All fear is implicit in the second, just as all 
love is inherent in the first. 
Because of this difference, the basic con¬ 
flict IS one between love and fear. 


T 2 E 32. 
So much, then, for the true nature of the major opponents in 
the basic conflict. 
Since all such theories lead to a form of therapy in 
which a re-distribution of psychic energy results, it is necessary to 
consider OUR concept of libido next. 
In this respect, Freud was 
more accurate than his followers, who were essentially more wish¬ 
ful. 
Energy CAN emanate from both Creation AND miscreation, 
and the particular ratio between them which prevails at a given 
point in time DOES determine behavior AT that time. 
If miscreation 
did NOT engender energy in its own right, it would be unable to 
produce destructive behavior, which it very patently DOES. 


T 2 E 33. 
Everything that man creates has energy because, like the 
Creation of God, they (it) come FROM energy, and are endowed by 
their creator with the power to create. 
Miscreation is still a genuine 
creative act in terms of the underlying IMPULSE, but NOT in terms 
of the CONTENT of the creation. 
This, however, does not deprive 
the creation of its OWN creative power. 
It DOES, however, GUAR¬ 
ANTEE that the power will be misused, or USED FEARFULLY. 


T 2 E 34. 
To deny this is merely the previously mentioned fallacy of 
depreciation. 
Although Freud made a number of fallacies of his 
own, he DID avoid this one in connection with libido. 
The later 
theorists denied the split-energy concept, not by attempting to heal 
it, but by re-interpreting it instead of T(109) -108 redistributing it. 


T 2 E 35. 
This placed them in the illogical position of assuming that 
the split which their therapies were intended to heal had not oc¬ 
curred. 
The result of this approach is essentially a form of hypnosis. 



124 NOV. 
16 


1-98 


108 




Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


This is quite different from Freud's approach, which merely ended 
in a deadlock. 


T 2 E 36. 
A similar deadlock occurs when both the power of Creation 
and of miscreation coexist. 
This is experienced as conflict only be¬ 
cause the individual feels AS IF both were occurring AT TFFE SAME 
LEVEL. 
FFe BELIEVES in what he has created in his own uncon¬ 
scious and he naturally believes it is real BECAUSE he has created 
it. 
Fie, thus, places himself in a position where the fearful becomes 
REAL. 


T 2 E 37. 
Nothing but level-confusion can result as long as this belief 
is held in ANY form. 
Inappropriate denial and equally inappropri¬ 
ate identification of the REAL factors in the basic conflict will NOT 
solve the problem itself. 
The conflict CANNOT disappear until it is 
fully recognized that miscreation is NOT real, and therefore there IS 
no conflict. 
This entails a full realization of the basic fact that, al¬ 
though man has miscreated in a very real sense, he need neither 
continue to do so, nor to suffer from his past errors in this respect. 


T 2 E 38. 
A REDISTRIBUTION of psychic energy, then, is NOT the 
solution. 
Both the idea that both kinds MUST exist, and the belief 
that ONE kind is amenable for use or misuse, are real distortions. 

The ONLY way is to STOP MISCREATING NOW, and accept the 
Atonement for miscreations of the past. 
T(110) -109 Only this can re¬ 
establish true single-mindedness. 
The structure of the psyche, as 
you very correctly noted yourself, follows along the lines of the par¬ 
ticular libido concept the theorist employs. 
(I still think it was the 
other way around - - FiS. 
Answer: This confusion arises out of the 
fact that you DID change the order - - several times in fact. 
Actually, 
it didn't matter, because the two concepts DO flow from each other. 

It was a TERRIFIC waste of time, and one in which I hardly care to 
become engaged myself. 
PLEASE !) 

T 2 E 39. 
Freud's psyche was essentially a good and evil picture, with 
very heavy weight given to the evil. 
This is because every time I 
mentioned the Atonement to him, which was quite often, he re¬ 
sponded by defending his theory more and more against it. 
This re- 


109 


1-99 




Volume I Text 


suited in his increasingly strong attempts to make the illogical 
sound more and more logical. 


T 2 E 40.1 was very sorry about this, because his was a singularly 
good mind, and it was a shame to waste it. 
However, the major 
purpose of his incarnation was not neglected. 
He DID succeed in 
forcing recognition of the unconscious into man's calculations about 
himself, a step in the right direction which should not be minimized. 

Freud was one of the most religious men I have known recently. 
Un¬ 
fortunately, he was so afraid of religion that the only way he could 
deal with it was to regard IT (not himself) as sick. 
This naturally pre¬ 
vented healing. 


T 2 E 41. 
Freud's superego is a particularly interesting example of the 
real power of miscreation. 
It is noteworthy throughout the whole 
development of his theories that the superego never allied itself 
with freedom. 
The most it could do in this direction was to T(lll) -110 
work out a painful truce in which both opponents LOST. 
This per¬ 
ception could not fail to force him to emphasize discontent in his 
view of civilization. 


T 2 E 42. 
The Freudian id is really only the more superficial level of 
the unconscious, and not the deepest level at all. 
This, too, was in¬ 
evitable, because Freud could not divorce miracles from magic. 
It 
was therefore his constant endeavor, (even preoccupation) to keep 
on thrusting more and more material between consciousness and 
the real deeper level of the unconscious, so that the latter became 
increasingly obscured. 
The result was a kind of bedlam, in which 
there was no order, no control, and no sense. 
This was exactly how 
he FELT about it. 


T 2 E 43. 
The later theoretical switch to the primacy of anxiety was an 
interesting device intended to deny both the instinctive nature of 
destructiveness, and the force of the power of miscreation. 
By plac¬ 
ing the emphasis on the RESULT, the generative nature of the 
power was minimized. 


T 2 E 44. 
Destructive behavior IS instinctual. 
The instinct for creation 
is NOT obliterated in miscreation. 
That is why it is always invested 


1-100 


110 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


with reality. 
*One of the chief ways in which man can correct his 
magic-miracle confusion is to remember that he did not create him¬ 
self. 
He is apt to forget this when he becomes egocentric, and this 
places him in a position where belief in magic is virtually inevitable. 

His instincts for creation were given him by his own Creator, who 
was expressing the same instinct in His Creation. 
Since the creative 
ability rests solely in the mind, everything which man creates is nec¬ 
essarily instinctive- 125 -T(ll2) -ill 126 IV 

T 2 E 45. 
(This goes after basic conflict theory.) (Dictated without 
notes by HS) 

T 2 E 46. 
We have already said that the basic conflict is one between 
love and fear, and that the proper organization of the psyche rests 
on a lack of level confusion. 
The section on psychic energy should 
be re-read very carefully, because it is particularly likely to be misin¬ 
terpreted until this section is complete. 


T 2 E 47. 
It has already been said that man CANNOT control fear, be¬ 
cause he himself created it. 
His belief in it renders it out of his con¬ 
trol by definition. 
For this reason, any attempt to resolve the basic 
conflict through 127 the concept of mastery of fear is meaningless. 
In 
fact, it asserts the power of fear by the simple assumption that it 
need be mastered at all. 


T 2 E 48. 
The essential resolution rests entirely on the mastery of love. 

In the interim, conflict is inevitable. 
The reason for this is the 
strangely illogical position in which man had placed himself. 
Since 
we have frequently emphasized that correction must be applied 
within the level that error occurs, it should be clear that the miracle 
MUST be illogical because its purpose is to correct the illogical and 
restore order. 



125 Starting at the fourth sentence, (*) the rest of this paragraph is crossed out. 
The material shows up 
again on page 116 prefaced with the words “Dictated without notes by HS”.T 2 E 57 This has not been 
located in the Notes. 


126 Nov. 
20, ‘65 

127 The shorthand form “thru” appears in the Urtext manuscript 


111 


1-101 



Volume I Text 


T 2 E 49. 
Two concepts which CANNOT coexist are nothing and eve¬ 
rything. 
To whatever extent one is believed in, the other HAS BEEN 
abolished. 
In the conflict, fear is really nothing, and love is really 
everything. 
(This recognition is really the basis for the castration 
complex.) This is because whenever light penetrates darkness, 128 it 
DOES abolish it. 
The unwillingness to be seen, or submit error to 
light, is spuriously associated with active doing. 
In this incarnation, 
this can take the form of oedipal involvement and concomitant cas¬ 
tration anxiety. 
T(113) -112 

T 2 E 50. 
However, in more long range and meaningful terms, the 
oedipal complex is a miniature of the true Separation fear, and the 
castration complex is a way of denying that it ever occurred. 
Like all 
pseudo-solutions, this kind of distorted thinking is very creative, 
but false. 
The Separation HAS occurred. 
To deny this is merely to 
misuse denial. 
However, to concentrate on error is merely a further 
misuse of legitimate psychic mechanisms. 
The true corrective pro¬ 
cedure, which has already been described as the proper use of the 
spiritual eye (or true vision), is to accept the error temporarily, BUT 
ONLY as an indication that IMMEDIATE correction is mandatory. 

This establishes a state of mind in which the Atonement can be ac¬ 
cepted without delay. 


T 2 E 51. 
It is worth repeating that ultimately there is no compromise 
possible between everything and nothing. 
The purpose of time is 
essentially a device by which all compromise in this respect can be 
abolished. 
It seems to be abolished by degrees precisely because 
time itself involves a concept of intervals which do 129 not really exist. 

The faulty use of creation has made this necessary as a corrective 
device. 


T 2 E 52. 
"And God so loved the world that He gave his only begotten 
Son so that whosoever believeth on Him shall not perish but have 

128 1 John 1:5 This is the message which we have heard from Him and declare to you, that God is light 
and in Him is no darkness at all. 


129 Urtext manuscript has “does not” but it appears that the “intervals” do not exist, not the “concept of 
intervals.” HLC also changes this to “do.” This has not been located in the Notes. 



1-102 


112 






Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


Eternal Life" 130 needs only one slight correction to be entirely mean¬ 
ingful in this context. 
It should read "And God so loved the world 
that he gave it TO His only begotten Son." It should be noted that 
God HAS begotten only ONE Son. 
T(ll4) 113 If you believe that all of 
the Souls that God created ARE His Sons, and if you also believe 
that the Sonship is One, then every Soul MUST be a Son of God, or 
an integral part of the Sonship. 
You do not find the concept that the 
whole is greater than its parts difficult to understand. 
You should 
therefore not have too great difficulty with this. 
The Sonship in its 
Oneness DOES transcend the sum of its parts. 
However, it loses this 
special state as long as any of its parts are missing. 
This is why the 
conflict cannot ultimately be resolved UNTIL all of the individual 
parts of the Sonship have returned. 
Only then, in the true sense, can 
the meaning of wholeness be understood. 


T 2 E 53. 
The concept of minus numbers has always been regarded as 
a mathematical rather than an actual expedient. 
(This is a major 
limitation on mathematics as presently understood.) Any statement 
which implies degrees of difference in negation is essentially mean¬ 
ingless. 
What can replace this negative approach is a recognition of 
the fact that as long as one part (which is the same as a million or ten 
or eight thousand parts) of the Sonship is missing, it is NOT com¬ 
plete. 


T 2 E 54. 
In the Divine psyche, the Father and the Holy Spirit are not 
incomplete at all. 
The Sonship has the unique faculty of believing in 
error, or incompleteness, if he so elects. 
However, it is quite appar¬ 
ent that so to elect IS to believe in the existence of nothingness. 
The 
correction of this error T(115) -114 is the Atonement. 


T 2 E 55. 
We have already briefly spoken about readiness. 
But there 
are some additional awarenesses which might be helpful. 
Readiness 
is nothing more than the prerequisite for accomplishment. 
The two 
should not be confused. 
As soon as a state of readiness occurs, there 


130 John 3:16 “For God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoever believes 
in Him should not perish but have everlasting life.” 


113 


1-103 




Volume I Text 


is always some will to accomplish, but this is by no means undi¬ 
vided. 
The state does not imply more than the potential for a shift of 
will. 
Confidence cannot develop fully until mastery has been ac¬ 
complished. 
We began this section with an attempt to correct the 
fundamental human error that fear can be mastered. 
The Correction 
was that ONLY love can be mastered. 
When I told you that you 
were "ready for Revelation", I did not mean that you had in any 
way mastered this form of communication. 
However, you yourself 
attested to your readiness by insisting that I would not have said so 
if it had not been true. 
This IS an affirmation of readiness. 
Mastery 
of love necessarily involves a much more complete confidence in the 
ability than either of you has attained. 
But the readiness at least is an 
indication that you believe this is possible. 
This is only the begin¬ 
ning of confidence. 


T 2 E 56. 
In case this be misunderstood as a statement that an enor¬ 
mous amount of time will be necessary between readiness and mas¬ 
tery, I would again remind you that time and space are under My 
control. 
T(ll6) -115 (Dictated without notes by HS) 

T 2 E 57. 
One of the chief ways in which man can correct his magic- 
miracle confusion is to remember that he did not create himself. 
He 
is apt to forget this when he becomes egocentric, and this places him 
in a position where belief in magic is virtually inevitable. 
His in¬ 
stincts for creation were given him by his own Creator, who was 
expressing the same instinct in His Creation. 
Since the creative abil¬ 
ity rests solely in the mind, everything which man creates is neces¬ 
sarily instinctive. 
T(117) -116 

T 2 E 58. 
It also follows that whatever he creates is real in his own 
eyes, but not necessarily in the sight of God. 
This basic distinction 
leads us directly into the real meaning of the Last Judgment. 
(I am 
aware of the fact that you would much rather continue with the par¬ 
allels involved in other theories of basic conflict. 
However, this 
would merely be a delay which we will engage in only if you regard 
it as essential.) 


1-104 


114 


Chapter 2 - The Illusion of Separation 


T 2 F. 
The Meaning of the Last Judgment (Not present in the 
Notes) 

T 2 F l. 
The Final Judgment is one of the greatest threat concepts in 
man's perception. 
This is only because he does not understand it. 

Judgment is not an essential attribute of God. 
Man brought judg¬ 
ment into being only because of the Separation. 
God Himself is still 
the God of mercy. 
After the Separation, however, there WAS a place 
for justice in the schema, because it was one of the many learning 
devices which had to be built into the overall plan. 
Just as the Sepa¬ 
ration occurred over many millions of years, the Last Judgment will 
extend over a similarly long period, and perhaps even longer. 
Its 
length depends, however, on the effectiveness of the present speed¬ 
up. 
We have frequently noted that the miracle is a device for short¬ 
ening but not abolishing time. 
If a sufficient number of people be¬ 
come truly miracle-minded quickly, the shortening process can be 
almost immeasurable. 
But it is essential that these individuals free 
themselves from fear sooner than would ordinarily be the case, be¬ 
cause they MUST emerge from basic conflict if they are to bring 
peace to the minds of others. 
T(ll8) -117 

T 2 F 2. 
The Last Judgment is generally thought of as a procedure un¬ 
dertaken by God. 
Actually, it will be undertaken solely by man, 
with My help. 
It is a Final Healing, rather than a meting out of pun¬ 
ishment, however much man may think punishment is deserved. 

Punishment as a concept is in total opposition to Right-Mindedness. 

The aim of the Final Judgment is to RESTORE Right-Mindedness TO 
man. 


T 2 F 3. 
The Final Judgment might be called a process of Right- 
evaluation. 
It simply means that finally all men must come to un¬ 
derstand what is worthy and what is not. 
After this, their ability to 
choose can be reasonably directed. 
Unless this distinction has been 
made, the vacillations between free and imprisoned will cannot but 
continue. 
The first step toward freedom, then, MUST entail a sorting 
out of the false from the true. 
This is a process of division only in the 
constructive sense, and reflects the true meaning of the Apocalypse. 



115 


1-105 


Volume I Text 


Man will ultimately look upon his own creations, and will to pre¬ 
serve only what is good, just as God Himself once looked upon 
what he had created, and knew that it WAS good. 
131 At this point, 
the Will will begin to look with love on its creations, because of their 
great worthiness. 
The mind will inevitably disown its miscreations, 
and having withdrawn belief from them, they will no longer exist. 


T 2 F 4. 
The term Last Judgment is frightening, not only because it 
has been falsely projected onto God, but also because of the associa¬ 
tion of "Last" with death. 
This is an outstanding example of upside 
down perception. 
Actually, if it is examined objectively, it is quite 
apparent that it is really the doorway to life. 
No man who lives in 
fear is really alive. 
T(ll9) -118 

T 2 F 5. 
His own final judgment cannot be directed toward himself, 
because he is not his own creation. 
He can apply it meaningfully, 
and at any time, to everything he has ever created, and retain in his 
real memory only what is good. 
This is what his own Right- 
Mindedness CANNOT BUT dictate. 
The purpose of time is solely to 
"give him time" to achieve this judgment. 
It is his own perfect 
judgment of his own creation. 
When everything that he retains is 
lovable, there is no reason for any fear to remain in him. 
This IS his 
part in the Atonement. 
T(120) 119 

131 Genesis 1:31 Then God saw everything that He had made, and indeed it was very good. 
So the 
evening and the morning were the sixth day. 



1-106 


116 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 

T 3 A. 
Introduction (Notes 296 5:145) 

T 3 A1. 
All learning involves attention and study at some level. 
This 
course is a MIND-TRAINING course. 
Good students assign study 
periods for themselves. 
However, since this obvious step has not 
occurred to you, and since we are cooperating in this, I will make 
the obvious assignment now. 


T 3 A 2. 
B is better at understanding the need to study the notes than 
you are, but neither of you realizes that many of the problems you 
keep being faced with may ALREADY have been solved there. 
YOU 
do not think of the notes in this way at all. 
B DOES from time to 
time, but he generally says, "It's probably in the notes," and 
DOESN'T look it up. 
He believes that, although he reads them over, 
they cannot REALLY help him until they are complete. 


T 3 A 3. 
First of all, he cannot be sure of this unless he tries. 
Second, 
they would BE completed if both of you so willed. 


T 3 A 4. 
You vaguely know that the course is intended for some sort 
of preparation. 
I can only say that you are not prepared. 


T 3 A 5. 
1 was amused when you reminded B. 
that he, too, was being 
prepared for something quite unexpected, and he said, he was not at 
all curious about what it was. 
This disinterest is very characteristic 
of him when he is afraid. 
Interest and fear do NOT go together, as 
your respective behavior clearly shows. 


T 3 A 6. 
Mental retardation is a defense which, like the others EX¬ 
CEPT the Atonement, can be used on behalf of error or truth, as 
elected. 
When it occurs in REALITY, it is a temporary device, agreed 
on beforehand, to check the miscreative abilities of strong but misdi¬ 
rected wills. 


T 3 A 7. 
It is necessary that this appropriate use of the defense BE 
considered real, because otherwise it cannot serve. 
The lesson in¬ 
volves not only the individual himself, but also his parents, siblings. 



117 


1-107 


Volume I Text 


and all of those who come in close relation with him. 
T(l2l) -120 The 
VALUE of the experience depends on the need of each particular 
learner. 
The person himself is a POOR learner, by definition, only as 
a step toward changing from a bad to a good one. 


T 3 A 8. 
Mental retardation can also be used as a maladaptive de¬ 
fense, if the wrong (or attack) side is employed. 
This produces the 
"pseudo-retardation syndrome" which is justly classified as a psy¬ 
chiatric (or disturbed-level) symptom. 
Both of you do this all the 
time. 
B. 
acts as if he does not understand even his OWN special lan¬ 
guage, let alone mine, and you cannot read at all. 


T 3 A 9. 
This represents a joint attack on both yourselves AND me, 
because it renders YOUR mind weak, and mine incompetent. 
Re¬ 
member, this puts you in a truly fearful position. 
If you cannot un¬ 
derstand either your own mind OR mine, you do not KNOW what 
is really willed. 
It is thus IMPOSSIBLE to avoid conflict, as defined 
before, because even if you act ACCORDING TO will, you wouldn't 
know it. 


T 3 A 10. 
The next part of this course rests too heavily on the earlier 
part not to REQUIRE its study. 
Without this, you will become much 
too fearful when the unexpected DOES occur to make constructive 
use of it. 
However, as you study the notes, you will see some of the 
obvious implications, unless you still persist in misusing the defense 
of mental retardation. 
Please remember that its constructive use, de¬ 
scribed above, is hardly a REAL part of your own REAL proper 
equipment. 
It is a PARTICULARLY 132 inappropriate defense as you 
use it, and I can only urge you to avoid it. 


T 3 A 11. 
The reason why a solid foundation is necessary at this point 
is because of the highly likely confusion of "fearful" and "awe¬ 
some," which most people do make. 
You will remember that we 
said once before that awe is inappropriate in connection with the 
Sons of God, because you should not experience awe in the presence 

132 Urtext manuscript has lower case underlined. 
It is underlined in the Notes also, which is how 
emphasis is indicated in that document. 



1-108 


118 




Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


of your own equals. 
133 T(l22) -121 But it WAS emphasized that awe IS 
a proper reaction of the Soul in the presence of its Creator. 


T 3 A 12. 
So far, this course has had only indirect recourse to God, and 
rarely even refers to Him directly. 
I have repeatedly emphasized 
that awe is not appropriate in connection with me, BECAUSE of our 
inherent equality. 
I have been careful to clarify my own role in the 
Atonement, without either over or understating it. 
I have tried to do 
exactly the same things in connection with yours. 


T 3 A13. 
The next step, however, DOES involve the direct approach 
to God Himself. 
It would be most unwise to start on this step at all 
without very careful preparation, or awe will surely be confused 
with fear, and the experience will be more traumatic than beatific. 


T 3 A14. 
Healing is of God in the end. 
The means are carefully ex¬ 
plained in the notes. 
Revelation has occasionally SHOWN you the 
end, but to reach it the means are needed. 
T(l23) -122 
T 3 A15. 
(The following Introduction dictated by HS without notes.) 
The following is the only detailed description which need be written 
down as to how error interferes with preparation. 
The events spe¬ 
cifically referred to here could be any events, nor does their particu¬ 
lar influence matter. 
It is the process which is to be noted here, and 
not its results. 
The kind of beliefs, and the fallacious premises in¬ 
volved in misthought are as well exemplified here as elsewhere. 

There is nothing of special interest about the events described be¬ 
low, EXCEPT their typical nature. 
If this is a true course in mind¬ 
training, then the whole value of this section rests ONLY in showing 
you what NOT to do. 
The more constructive emphasis is, of course, 
on the positive approach. 
Mind-watching would have prevented 
any of this from occurring, and will do so any time you permit it to. 


T 3 A 16. 
(Following is from notes) Tell B. 
that the reason why he was 
so strained yesterday is because he allowed himself a number of 
fear-producing attitudes. 
They were fleeting enough to be more 
will-of-the-wisps than serious will-errors, but unless he watches this 

133 Miracle Principle 41 (1 C 0 41) 


119 


1-109 



Volume I Text 


kind of thing, he WILL find the notes fearful, and, knowing him 
well, will mis-distantiate. 
His unprovoked irritation was unpardon¬ 
able EXCEPT by himself, and he did not choose to pardon it. 
YOU 
did, but I am afraid you were under some strain in doing so. 
This 
was unfortunate, and weakened your own ability to behave heal- 
ingly toward B. 
at the time, and later also toward Louis, both of 
whom DID act stupidly. 
But one stupidity at a time is usually 
enough. 
You are getting too close to the misuse of mental retarda¬ 
tion when stupidity sets in all around. 


T 3 A 17. 
B., having already weakened himself, was very un-miracle- 
minded, first by not asking Dora if she wanted a lift in the cab, 
which was going her way. 
Even if she didn't want it, she would 
have been able to use the thought well. 
There is probably no human 
error that is T(124) -123 more fear-provoking (in the will/behavior con¬ 
flict sense) than countering any form of error with error. 
The result 
can be highly inflammable. 
By reacting to Dora's stupidity with his 
own, all of the elements which are virtually certain to engender fear 
have been provided. 


T 3 A 18. 
B should note that this is one of the few times that he had to 
wait for a cab. 
He thought he took care of it by holding the door of a 
cab which did come for that lady, but he was misguided in this be¬ 
lief. 
Beliefs are THOUGHTS, and thus come under Christ-guidance, 
NOT control. 
Actually, by giving this cab to her, he was very unkind 
to you. 
It was quite apparent that you were extremely cold, and also 
very late. 
The idea that giving her the cab would atone for his previ¬ 
ous errors was singularly out of place, and well calculated to lead to 
further error. 
If, instead of attempting to atone on his own, he had 
asked for guidance, there would have been no difficulty whatever in 
the cab situation. 
It was not necessary that anyone wait at all. 


T 3 A 19. 
B's original slight to Dora, because of his own need to get 
home as he perceived it, stopped him from benefiting from the time¬ 
saving device of the miracle. 
He would have gotten home MUCH 
quicker if he had taken time to use time properly. 



1-110 


120 


Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


T 3 A 20. 
YOU were still suffering from strain (see above), and got 
quite irritated at the girl who stood next to the door on the side 
which blocked its opening. 
Her presence there made it necessary 
each time the door was opened to hold it for a much longer time 
than was necessary, and you were angry because this made you 
cold. 
Actually, the girl was taking care of the younger child who 
was standing outside, and both of them were really mentally re¬ 
tarded. 
If you will remember, the older girl asked you very uncer¬ 
tainly about the bus, and you were well aware at the time of her ex¬ 
treme uncertainty. 
T(125) -124 

T 3 A 21. 
It would have been much wiser had you built up her confi¬ 
dence, instead of associating with her stupidity. 
This reduced your 
own efficiency, and the only thing that saved you then was that you 
DID remember, in the cab, to ask me about the notes, instead of as¬ 
suming that you were necessarily to arrange to meet the next day 
and go over them. 
B. 
had already become so misguided that it did 
not occur to him that his own will, (which he justified by the con¬ 
tents of the recent notes —a misuse of truth only seemingly on its 
own behalf) might be questionable. 
(You took poor notes yourself 
here, because you got mad at him on remembering this. 
While you 
did try to will right in the cab, you did not quite succeed. 
The error 
is showing up now.) 

T 3 A 22. 
B thus placed himself in a condition to experience a fear 
rather than a love reaction. 
(HS notes that she was going to write 
"an excellent position," but did not do so. 
Answer: You were right 
about the misuse of "excellent" here, and please do cross it out. 
You 
are STILL angry. 
An excellent position for miscreation is not a 
meaningful approach to the problem.) 

T 3 A 23. 
It was indeed 444 discourteous ("indeed" is not necessary; it 
was your OWN error here; I am NOT saying this with any harsh 
overtones at all. 
I am just trying to create better learning conditions 

134 Urtext manuscript has the word “indeed” crossed out, as does the Notes. 



121 


1-111 




Volume I Text 


for the study periods. 
We want as little interference as possible, for 
VERY good reasons.) 

T 3 A 24. 
Now, go back to B; he WAS discourteous when he told you 
that HE wanted to keep the original copy of the notes, having de¬ 
cided to have them Xeroxed on his OWN will, and then justifying it 
by a very slight misinterpretation of what I said about "useful for 
others." In fact, if he will re-read the actual quote, he will see that it 
REALLY means "useful for HIM." YOU had interpreted it 135 that 
way, and frankly this was pretty clear to me at the time. 
T(l26) -125 
But this sort of thing happens all the time. 
It should, be noted, how¬ 
ever, that the result was not only considerable and totally unneces¬ 
sary planning on B's part, but also a failure to utilize what WAS in¬ 
tended for him as a help for HIMSELF. 
And before YOU get too self- 
satisfied, I would remind you that you do it all the time, too. 


T 3 A 25. 
B. 
acted inappropriately toward YOU, by saying that he 
wanted to be SURE that the original was not lost or dirty. 
It is no¬ 
ticeable that, having already decided what HE wanted to do, it 
never occurred to him that it IS possible that HE might lose or dirty 
them himself, especially as he had not entrusted them to me. 
This is 
a form of arrogance that he would be much happier without. 
He 
should also note that this would probably not have occurred had he 
not been ALREADY literally "off the beam." Be SURE to tell him 
that this pun is to reassure him that I am not angry. 
If he does not 
get it, or does not like it, I KNOW it is not very good. 
The reason is 
that HE put me in a position where I can really give him very little 
at the moment. 


T 3 A 26. 
But I want him to know that I am VERY well aware of the 
exceedingly few times he now makes errors of this kind. 
He has 
come a VERY long way in this respect. 
It seems a shame that he 
should allow himself even this much discomfort from it. 


T 3 A 27. 
1 suggest to YOU that we pray for him, and I pray for your 
full cooperation in this. 
This will correct YOUR errors, and help him 

135 Urtext manuscript does not have “it” here but the Notes does and it is clearly needed. 



1-112 


122 





Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


react better to the work on the bookcase, which may otherwise lend 
itself for misuse by misprojection. 
There would have been no prob¬ 
lem at all about the bookcase, and perhaps even no bookcase, if the 
solution of the storage problem had been left to me. 
I have promised 
to guide you OUT of problems, and will certainly not create them 
for you. 
But this means that you do not undertake to solve them 
yourselves. 
A storage problem is hardly more difficult for me to 
solve that a space problem, (see comments under special principles 
for miracle workers.) T(127) -126 

T 3 A 28. 
You started well in your attempt to pray with me for B., but 
ended badly. 
This is because you had already made a number of 
earlier errors. 
You were wrong to be pleased with Bill F's criticism of 
Rose, and should not have enjoyed Bill F's description of Zanvil's 
caricaturing of her. 
You could have laughed WITH Bill, but NOT AT 
Rose. 
Real courtesy NEVER does this. 
You should know that all 
God's children are fully worthy of COMPLETE courtesy. 
You 
should NEVER join with one at the EXPENSE of another. 


T 3 A 29. 
When you called B about joining you. 
Gene, & Anne at 
lunch, YOU should have waited to ask ME. 
In fact, you should not 
even have told Anne that you would call. 
Then you could have 
asked B. 
FIRST if FIE would want to come, and called ANNE back. 


It is true that it was better that he came, but this has nothing to do 
with the real issue. 
There are ways of treating others in which 
ONLY consistent courtesy, even in very little things, is offered. 
This 
is a VERY HEALING habit to acquire. 


T 3 A 30. 
B's answer to your call was a clear statement of his own 
sadly conflicted state. 
He said, "I don't want to join you, but that's 
ungracious, so I'll go." Whenever ANY invitation to join others in a 
gracious way is offered, it should ALWAYS be met with respect, al¬ 
though it need not always be accepted. 
However, if it is MET ungra¬ 
ciously the resulting feeling may well be one of coercion. 
This is 
ALWAYS a split-will reaction. 


T 3 A 31. 
B. 
did not solve this by ACTING graciously. 
The lunch need 
not have entailed either mental or physical strain for him, and no 


123 


1-113 


Volume I Text 


"need to escape" should have arisen. 
This was a regression of the 
unprofitable kind. 
B. 
will continue to experience this need from time 
to time, until he is willing to realize that there is nothing he needs or 
wants to escape from. 


T 3 A 32. 
It is very hard to get out of the chain of miscreation which 
can arise out of even the simplest mis-thought. 
To borrow one of 
your own phrases, "This kind of human tragedy is far easier to avert 
than to undo." T(128) -127 

T 3 A 33. 
You must both learn not to let this kind of chain reaction 
START. 
You will NOT be able to control it once it has started, be¬ 
cause everything and everyone will be pulled into the misprojection, 
and misinterpreted accordingly. 
NOTHING is lovely to the unlov¬ 
ing. 
This is because they are CREATING ugliness. 


T 3 A 34. 
You, Helen, were definitely not acting right-mindedly by 
writing these notes right in front of Jonathan. 
(Note that you wrote 
his name as "Jonathan" this time, although previously in these same 
notes you referred to him as "Louis," intentionally using his real 
name. 
Actually, of course, it does not matter what you call him, but 
NOTE that you FELT FREE at that time to CHOOSE the name YOU 
preferred to use. 
This time, you were FORCED to call him "Jona¬ 
than" because you were ATTACKING him when you took the notes 
in front of him, and are now falling back on the magical device of 
"protecting his name." 

T 3 A 35. 
(I had been considering calling B rather ambivalently, and 
had gotten up to do so, but remembered to ask. 
The answer was to 
call him at 8:30. 
It would be better if HE called, but he may not de¬ 
cide to do so. 
If he does not, you should try to get through, and if he 
has decided NOT to be there, just leave a message that it is not im¬ 
portant. 
This is still a kindly gesture, and the message should be put 
in a gentle way.) (B. 
did call HS) 

T 3 A 36. 
Without going into further elaboration, and we could devote 
many hours to this, lets consider all the time that we had to waste 
today. 
AND all the notes that could have been devoted to a better 
purpose than undoing the waste, and thus creating further waste. 



1-114 


124 


Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


There IS a better use for time, too. 
I would have liked to have spent 
some time on corrections of the past notes, as an important step be¬ 
fore reviewing them. 
A major point of clarification is necessary in 

connection with the phrase "replacing hatred (or fear) with love." 
T(129)-128 

T 3 A 37. 
(No, Helen, do NOT check this against the prayer that B. 

very kindly typed for you on the card. 
That WAS a gracious offering 
on his part, and YOU also accepted it with grace at the time. 
Why 
should you deprive yourself of the value of the offering by referring 
this correction first to HIM?) 

T 3 A 38. 
(These notes did not continue at this time, due to the obvious 
fact that HS was still clearly not in her right mind. 
However, B later 
suggested that "correct" or "correct for" should be used instead of 
"replace." At the time, he was quite sure about this, and he was per¬ 
fectly right. 
The reason why it was essential that HE make this cor¬ 
rection was that the word "replace" was his choice originally, and 
reflected a temporary misunderstanding of his own. 
It was, how¬ 
ever, both courteous and necessary that he change this himself, both 
as a sign of his own better understanding, and of an avoidance of 
correction by someone else, which would have been discourteous.) 
T(130) -129 136 

T 3 B. 
Special Principles for Miracle Workers (Notes 312 
5:161) 

T 3 B l. 
The miracle abolishes the need for lower order concerns. 


Since it is an illogical, or out-of-pattern time interval, by definition, 
the ordinary considerations of time and space do not apply. 


T 3 B la. 
For example, I do NOT regard time as you and B. 
do, and 
Kolb's space problem is NOT mine. 
When YOU perform a miracle, I 
will arrange both time and space to adjust to it. 
137 

136 Sunday, Nov. 
2 

137 The paragraphs in this segment are all numbered, except for this one, T 3 B la. 
While there is a 
paragraph break in the Urtext manuscript, it is not present in the Notes and appears to be a “copying 
artifact” and not an intentional edit or part of the original dictation. 
We thus preseved the manuscript’s 
numbering of principles, which is also present in th eNotes. 



125 


1-115 



Volume I Text 


T 3 B 2. 
Clear distinction between what HAS BEEN Created and what 
IS BEING created is essential. 
ALL forms of correction (or healing) 
rest on this FUNDAMENTAL correction in level perception. 


T 3 B 3. 
Another way of stating 2) is: NEVER confuse right with 
wrong-mindedness. 
Responding to ANY form of miscreation with 
anything EXCEPT a DESIRE TO HEAL (or a miracle) is an expres¬ 
sion of this confusion. 


T 3 B 4. 
The miracle is ALWAYS a DENIAL of this error, and an af¬ 
firmation of the truth. 
Only Right-Mindedness CAN create in a way 
that has any real effect. 
Pragmatically, what has no real effect, has 
no real existence. 
Its REAL effect, then, is emptiness. 
Being without 
substantial content, it lends itself to projection. 


T 3 B 5. 
The level-adjustment power of the miracle creates the right 
perception for healing. 
Until this has occurred, healing cannot be 
understood. 
Forgiveness is an empty gesture, unless it entails cor¬ 
rection. 
Without this, it is essentially judgmental, rather than heal¬ 
ing. 
T(131) -130 

T 3 B 6. 
Miraculous forgiveness is ONLY correction. 
It has no element 
of judgment at all. 
"Father forgive them for they know not what 
they do" 138 in NO way EVALUATES what they do. 
It is strictly lim¬ 
ited to an appeal to God to HEAL their minds. 
There is no reference 
to the outcome of their misthought. 
THIS does not matter. 


T 3 B 7. 
The Biblical injunction "Be of one mind" 139 is the statement 
for REVELATION readiness. 
My OWN injunction "Do this in re- 


138 Luke 23:34 And Jesus said, “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.” And parting 
his garments among them, they cast lots. 


139 2 Corinthians 13:11 Finally, brethren, farewell. 
Become complete. 
Be of good comfort, be of one 
mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace will be with you. 
Also Philippians 2:1:8 
Philemon 2:1- 8 If there is therefore any comfort in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship 
of the Spirit, if any tender mercies and compassions, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be of the same mind, 
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind ; doing nothing through faction or through 
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind each counting other better than himself; not looking each of you to 
his own things, but each of you also to the things of others. 
Have this mind in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God, counted it not a prize to be on an equality with God, but 
emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; and being found in 
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death, yea, the death of the cross. 



1-116 


126 





Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


membrance of me" 140 is the request for cooperation in miracle- 
workers. 
It should be noted that the two statements are not in the 
same order of reality, because the latter involves a time awareness, 
since memory implies recalling the PAST in the present. 


T 3 B 8. 
Time is under MY direction, but Timelessness belongs to God 
alone. 
In time, we exist for and with each other. 
In Timelessness, we 
coexist with God. 
T(l32) -131 141 

T 3 C. 
Atonement without Sacrifice (Notes 317 5:166) 

T 3 c 1. 
There is one more point which must be perfectly clear before 
any residual fear which may still be associated with miracles be¬ 
comes entirely groundless. 
The Crucifixion did NOT establish the 
Atonement. 
The Resurrection did. 
This is a point which many very 
sincere Christians have misunderstood. 
Nobody who was free of the 
scarcity-fallacy could POSSIBLY have made this mistake. 


T 3 C 2. 
If the Crucifixion is seen from an upside down point of view, 
it certainly does appear AS IF God permitted, and even encouraged, 
one of his Sons to suffer BECAUSE he was good. 
Many very de¬ 
voted ministers preach this every day. 
This particularly unfortunate 
interpretation, which actually arose out of the combined misprojec- 
tion of a large number of my own would-be followers, has led many 
people to be bitterly afraid of God. 


T 3 C 3. 
This particularly anti-religious concept happens to enter into 
many religions, and this is neither by chance nor coincidence. 


T 3 C 4. 
The real Christian would have to pause and ask "how could 
this be?" Is it likely that God Himself would be capable of the kind 
of thinking which His own Words have clearly stated is unworthy 
of man? 


While there are other candidates; Romans 15:5, Romans 12:16; the passage in Philemon, which 
concludes with a reference to the crucifixion reflects the Course which immediately proceeds to discuss 
the crucifixion. 


140 Luke 22:19 And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is 
my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me.; Also 1 Corinthians 11:23-25 

141 Nov. 
22 Tuesday 


127 


1-117 



Volume I Text 


T 3 C 5. 
(There are times when) The best defense, as always, is NOT to 
attack another's position, but rather to protect the truth. 
It is not 
necessary to consider anything acceptable, if you have to turn a 
whole frame of reference around in order to justify it. 
This proce¬ 
dure is painful in its minor T(133) -132 applications, and genuinely 
tragic on a mass basis. 
Persecution is a frequent result, justifying the 
terrible misperception 14 ’ that God Himself persecuted His own Son 
on behalf of salvation. 
The very words are meaningless. 


T 3 C 6. 
It has always been particularly difficult to overcome this be¬ 
cause, although the error itself is no harder to overcome than any 
other error, men were unwilling to give it up because of its promi¬ 
nent escape value. 
In milder forms, a parent says "This hurts me 
more than it hurts you," and feels exonerated in beating a child. 
Can 
you believe that the Father REALLY thinks this way? 

T 3 C 7. 
It is so essential that all such thinking be dispelled that we 
must be VERY sure that NOTHING of this kind remains in your 
mind. 
143 1 was NOT punished because YOU were bad. 
The wholly 
benign lesson which the Atonement teaches is wholly lost if it is 
tainted with this kind of distortion in ANY form. 


T 3 C 8. 
"Vengeance is Mine sayeth the Lord" 144 is strictly a karmic 
viewpoint. 
It is a real misperception of truth, by which man assigns 
his own evil past to God. 
The "evil conscience" from the past has 
nothing to do with God. 
He did not create it, and He does not main¬ 
tain it. 
God does NOT believe in karmic retribution at all. 
His Divine 
mind does not create that way. 
HE does not hold the evil deeds of a 
man even against HIMSELF. 
Is it likely, then, that He would hold 
against any man the evil that ANOTHER did? T(134) -133 

T 3 C 9. 
Be very sure that you recognize how impossible this assump¬ 
tion really is, and how ENTIRELY it arises from misprojection. 
This 


142 The Notes has “justified by the terrible misprojection” 

143 The Urtext manuscript has “minds” but the Notes has “minds.” 

144 Deuteronomy 32:35 Vengeance is Mine, and recompense; Their foot shall slip in due time; For the 
day of their calamity is at hand, And the things to come hasten upon them.' 

Romans 12:19 Beloved, do not avenge yourselves, but rather give place to wrath; for it is written, 
“Vengeance is Mine, I will repay,” says the Lord. 



1-118 


128 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


kind of error is responsible for a host of related fallacies, including 
the misbelief that God rejected man and forced him out of the Gar¬ 
den of Eden, 145 or that I am misdirecting you. 
I have made every ef¬ 
fort to use words which are ALMOST impossible to distort, but man 
is very inventive when it comes to twisting symbols around. 


T 3 c 10. 
God Himself is not symbolic; He is FACT. 
The Atonement, 
too, is totally without symbolism. 
It is perfectly clear, because it ex¬ 
ists in light. 
Only man's attempts to shroud it in darkness have 
made it inaccessible to the unwilling, and ambiguous to the partly 
willing. 
The Atonement itself radiates nothing but truth. 
It therefore 
epitomizes harmlessness, and sheds ONLY blessing. 
It could not do 
this if it arose from anything other than perfect innocence! Inno¬ 
cence is wisdom, because it is unaware of evil, which does not exist. 

It is, however, PERFECTLY aware of EVERYTHING, that is true. 


T 3 C ll. 
The Resurrection demonstrated that NOTHING can destroy 
truth. 
Good can withstand ANY form of evil, because light abolishes 
ALL forms of darkness. 
146 The Atonement is thus the perfect lesson. 

It is the final demonstration that all of the other lessons which I 
taught are true. 
T(l35) -134 

T 3 C 12. 
Man is released from ALL errors if he believes in this. 
The 
deductive approach to teaching accepts the generalization which is 
applicable to ALL single instances, rather than building up the gen¬ 
eralization after analyzing numerous single instances separately. 
If 
you can accept the ONE GENERALIZATION NOW, there will be no 
need to learn from many smaller lessons. 


T 3 C 13. 
NOTHING can prevail against a Son of God who commends 
his Spirit into the hands of His Father. 
147 By doing this, the mind 


145 Genesis 3:23-24 Therefore the LORD God sent him out of the garden of Eden to till the ground from 
which he was taken. 
So He drove out the man; and He placed cherubim at the east of the garden of 
Eden, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to guard the way to the tree of life. 


146 1 John 1:5 This is the message which we have heard from Him and declare to you, that God is light 
and in Him is no darkness at all. 


147 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them.; Also: Luke 23:46 And when 


129 


1-119 




Volume I Text 


awakens from its sleep, and the Soul remembers its Creator. 
All 
sense of Separation disappears, and level confusion vanishes. 
The 
Son of God IS part of the holy Trinity, but the Trinity Itself is One. 

There is no confusion within ITS levels, because they are of One 
Mind and One Will. 
This Single Purpose creates perfect integration, 
and establishes the (reign of the) Peace of God. 


T 3 C 14. 
But this vision can be perceived only by the truly innocent. 

Because their hearts are pure, they defend true perception, instead 
of defending themselves AGAINST it. 
Understanding the lesson of 
the Atonement, they are without the will to attack, and therefore 
they see truly. 
This is what the Bible means when it says "(and) 
when He shall appear (or be perceived) we shall be like Him, for we 
shall see Him AS HE IS ." 148 T(l36) -135 

T 3 C 15. 
Sacrifice is a notion totally unknown to God. 
It arises solely 
from fear of the Records . 
149 This is particularly unfortunate, because 
frightened people are apt to be vicious. 
Sacrificing others in any way 
is a clear-cut violation of God's own injunction that man should be 
merciful even as His Father in Heaven is merciful . 
150 
T 3 C 16. 
It has been harder for many Christians to realize that this 
commandment (or assignment) also applies to THEMSELVES. 
Good 
teachers never terrorize their students. 
To terrorize is to attack, and 
this results in rejection of what the teacher offers. 
This results in 
learning failures. 


T 3 C 17.1 have been correctly referred to in the Bible as "The Lamb of 
God who taketh away the sins of the world ." 151 Those who represent 
the lamb as blood-stained (an all too widespread conceptual error) 
do NOT understand the meaning of the symbol. 



Jesus had cried out with a loud voice, He said, “Father, “into Your hands I commit My spirit.”' Having 
said this, He breathed His last. 


148 1 John 3:2 Beloved, now we are children of God; and it has not yet been revealed what we shall be, 
but we know that when He is revealed, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. 


149 It is not entirely certain what the word “Records,” capitalized, refers to but it may be the “Akashic 
Record.” 

150 Luke 6:36 “Be ye merciful, even as your Father is merciful.” 

151 John 1:29 On the morrow he seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold, the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world! 


1-120 


130 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


T 3 C 18. 
Correctly understood, the symbol is a very simple parable, 
or teaching device, which merely depicts my innocence. 
The lion 
and the lamb lying down together 152 refers to the fact that strength 
and innocence are NOT in conflict, but naturally live in peace. 

"Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God" 153 is another 
way of saying the same thing. 
Only the innocent CAN see God. 


T 3 C 19. 
There has been some controversy (in human terms) as to 
whether seeing is an attribute of the eyes, or an expression of the 
integrative powers of the brain. 
Correctly understood, the issue re¬ 
volves around the question of whether T(137) -136 the body or the 
mind can see (or understand). 
This is not really open to question at 
all. 


T 3 C 20. 
The body is not capable of understanding. 
Only the mind 
KNOWS anything. 
A pure mind knows the truth, and this IS its 
strength. 
It cannot attack the body, because it knows EXACTLY 
what the body IS. 
This is what "a sane mind in a sane body" really 
means. 


T 3 C 21. 
A sane mind is NOT out for blood. 
It does not confuse de¬ 
struction with innocence, because it associates innocence with 
strength, NOT with weakness. 
Innocence is INCAPABLE of sacrific¬ 
ing anything, because the innocent mind HAS everything and 
strives only to PROTECT its Wholeness. 
This is why it CANNOT 
misproject. 
It can only honor man, because honor is the NATURAL 
greeting of the truly loved to others who are LIKE them. 


T 3 C 22. 
The lamb taketh away the sins of the world 154 only in the 
sense that the state of innocence or Grace, is one in which the mean¬ 
ing of the Atonement is perfectly apparent. 
The innocence of God is 
the true state of the mind of His Son. 
In this state, man's mind DOES 
see God, and because he sees Him as he Is, he knows that the 


152 Isaiah 11:6 “The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, The leopard shall lie down with the young 
goat, The calf and the young lion and the fatling together; And a little child shall lead them.” 

153 Psalm 24:4 He who has clean hands and a pure heart, Who has not lifted up his soul to an idol, Nor 
sworn deceitfully. 
Also: Matthew 5:8 Blessed are the pure in heart, For they shall see God. 


154 John 1:29 On the morrow he seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, “Behold, the Lamb of God, 
which taketh away the sin of the world!” 


131 


1-121 




Volume I Text 


Atonement, NOT sacrifice, is the ONLY appropriate gift to His 
OWN altar, where nothing except perfection truly belongs. 
155 The 
understanding of the innocent is TRUTH. 
That is why their altars 
are truly radiant. 
T(138) -137 

T 3 C 23. 
(Dictated directly without notes) pp 7-12 Though Christians 
generally (but by no means universally) recognize the contradiction 
involved in victimizing others, they are less adept at ensuring their 
own inability to victimize themselves. 
Although this appears to be a 
much more benign error from the viewpoint of society, it is never¬ 
theless inherently dangerous because once a two-edged defense is 
used, its direction cannot be self-controlled. 


T 3 C 24. 
B. 
recently observed how many ideas were condensed into 
relatively few pages here. 
This is because we have not been forced to 
dispel miscreations throughout. 
(There is one set of notes not yet 
transcribed which is devoted to this. 
These emphasize only the 
enormous waste of time that is involved.) 156 Cayce's notes, too, 
could have been much shortened. 
Their excessive length is due to 
two factors. 
The first involves a fundamental error which Cayce 
himself made, and which required constant undoing. 
The second is 
more related to the attitude of his followers. 
They are unwilling to 
omit anything he said. 
This is respectful enough, but not overly- 
judicious. 
I would be a far better editor, if they would allow me this 
position on their staff. 


T 3 C 25. 
It is obvious that Cayce himself was not able to transcend 
the misperceptions of the need for sacrifice, or he could not possibly 
have been willing to sacrifice himself. 
Anyone who is unable to 
leave the requests of others unanswered has not entirely tran¬ 
scended egocentricity. 
T(139) -138 1 never "gave of myself" in this in¬ 
appropriate way, nor would I ever have encouraged Cayce to do so. 


1,5 Hosea 6:6 For I desire mercy and not sacrifice. 
And the knowledge of God more than burnt 
offerings. 
Also: Matthew 9:13 But go and learn what this means: “I desire mercy and not sacrifice. 
For 
I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.” 

156 it is not clear if that set of notes was ever transcribed, or if it has survived at all. 



1-122 


132 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


T 3 C 26. 
Cayce could not see the Atonement as totally lacking in sac¬ 
rifice at ANY level. 
It WAS obvious to him that the mind cannot be 
so limited. 
It was equally apparent to him that the Soul is merely 
unaffected by such an idea. 
This left him only the body with which 
to invest his misperception. 
This is also why he used his own mind 
at the "EXPENSE of his body." 

T 3 c 27. 
Because Cayce was a somewhat erratic listener, he was 
compelled to correct his own errors at very great length, and not al¬ 
ways adequately. 
Consider the basis from which he started, when 
he began with "yes, we have the body." It is noteworthy that in all 
these readings, a large section was actually devoted to the body, 
even though he usually concluded with the caution that the body 
cannot be healed by itself. 
It would have saved an enormous num¬ 
ber of words if he had always begun with this. 


T 3 C 28. 
Cayce and his devotion to me are in no way underestimated 
by the realization that he worked under very great strain, which is 
ALWAYS a sign that something is wrong. 
One of the difficulties in¬ 
herent in trance states is that it is very difficult to overcome the split 
which the trance itself induces through the medium of communica¬ 
tions made while in the trance state. 
T(140) -139 

T 3 C 29. 
Cayce's whole approach put him in a real double-bind, from 
which he did not recover. 
When he spoke of a dream in which he 
saw his own rather immanent reincarnation, he was perfectly accu¬ 
rate. 
He was sufficiently attuned to real communication to make it 
easy to correct his errors, and free him to communicate without 
strain. 
It is noticeable throughout his notes that he frequently en¬ 
gaged in a fallacy that we have already noted in some detail: 
namely, the tendency to endow the physical with nonphysical prop¬ 
erties. 
Cayce suffered greatly from this error. 
He did not make either 
of the other three. 
However, you will remember that it is this one 
which is particularly vulnerable to magical associations. 
Cayce's ac¬ 
curacy was so great that, even when he did this, he was able to ap¬ 
ply it constructively. 
But it does not follow that this was a genuinely 
constructive approach. 



133 


1-123 


Volume I Text 


T 3 C 30. 
It should also be noted that, when Cayce attempted to "see" 
the body in proper perspective, he saw physically discernible auras 
surrounding it. 
This is a curious compromise, in which the non¬ 
physical attributes of the self are approached AS IF they could be 
seen with the physical eye. 


T 3 C 31. 
Cayce's illiteracy never stood in his way. 
This is because il¬ 
literacy does not necessarily imply any lack of love, and in Cayce's 
case very definitely did not. 
He therefore had no difficulty at all in 
overcoming this seeming limitation. 
T(141) -140 What DID hamper 
him was a profound sense of personal unworthiness, which, charac¬ 
teristically enough, was sometimes over-compensated for in what 
might be called a Christian form of grandiosity. 
Cayce was essen¬ 
tially uncharitable to himself. 
This made him very erratic in his own 
miracles, and, because he was genuinely anxious to help others, left 
himself in a highly vulnerable position. 


T 3 C 32. 
His son comments both on the rather erratic nature of the 
Cayce household, and also on the rather uneven nature of Cayce's 
temper. 
Both of these observations are true, and clearly point to the 
fact that Cayce did not apply the Peace of God to himself. 
Once this 
had occurred, particularly in a man whose communication channels 
were open, it was virtually impossible for him to escape external 
solutions. 
Cayce was a very religious man, who should have been 
able to escape fear through religion. 
Being unable to apply his relig¬ 
ion wholeheartedly to himself, he was forced to accept certain magi¬ 
cal beliefs which were alien to his own Christianity. 
This is why he 
was so different when he was asleep, and even disowned what he 
said in this state. 


T 3 C 33. 
The lack of integration which this split state implies is 
clearly shown in certain off-the-mark detours into areas such as the 
effects of stones on the mind, and some curious symbolic attempt to 
integrate churches and glands. 
(This is hardly more peculiar than 
some of your own confusion.) T(142) -141 

T 3 C 34. 
Cayce's mind was imprisoned to some extent by an error 
against which you have been cautioned several times. 
He looked to 


1-124 


134 


Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


the past for an EXPLANATION of the present, but he never suc¬ 
ceeded in separating the past FROM the present. 
When he said 
"mind is the builder," he did not realize that it is only what it is 
building NOW that really creates the future. 
The past, in itself, does 
not have the ability to do this. 
Whenever we move from one instant 
to the next, the previous one no longer exists. 
In considering the 
body as the focus for healing, Cayce was expressing his own failure 
to accept this AS ACCOMPLISHED. 
He did not fail to recognize the 
value of the Atonement for others, but he did fail to accept its cor¬ 
rective merit for himself. 


T 3 C 35. 
As we have frequently emphasized, man CANNOT control 
his own errors. 
Having created them, he does believe in them. 
Be¬ 
cause of his failure to accept his own perfect freedom FROM the 
past, Cayce could not really perceive others as similarly free. 
This is 
why I have not wholly endorsed the Cayce documents for wide¬ 
spread use. 


T 3 C 36.1 am heartily supportive of the ARE's endeavor to make 
Cayce's singular contributions immortal, but it would be most un¬ 
wise to have them promulgated as a faith until they have been 
purged of their essential errors. 
This is why T(143) -142 there have 
been a number of unexplained set backs in their explication. 
It is 
also one of the many reasons why the Cayce material, a major step 
in the speedup, must be properly understood before it can be mean¬ 
ingfully validated. 


T 3 c 37. 
Cayce's son has been wise in attempting to deal with reli¬ 
ability, which in Cayce's case is very high. 
There is a way of validat¬ 
ing the material, and Hugh Lynn is perfectly aware that this must be 
done eventually. 
He is also aware of the fact that he is unable to do 
it. 
In the present state of the material, it would be most unwise even 
to attempt it. 
There is too much that IS invalid. 
When the time 
comes that this can be corrected to the point of real safety, I assure 
you it will be accomplished. 
In tribute to Cayce, I remind you that 
no effort is wasted, and Cayce's effort was very great. 



135 


1-125 



Volume I Text 


T 3 C 38. 
It would be most ungrateful of me if I allowed his work to 
produce a generation of witch doctors. 
I am sorry that Cayce himself 
could not rid himself of a slight tendency in this direction. 
But for¬ 
tunately I have a fuller appreciation of him than he had. 


T 3 C 39.1 am repeating here a Biblical injunction of my own, already 
mentioned elsewhere, that if my followers eat any deadly thing it 
shall not hurt them . 
157 This is what Cayce could NOT believe, be¬ 
cause he could not see that, as a Son of God, he WAS invulnerable. 

T(144)-143 

T 3 D, Miracles as Accurate Perception (Not present in the 
Notes) 

(DICTATED WITHOUT NOTES 158 ) 

T 3 D l. 
We have repeatedly stated that the basic concepts referred to 
throughout the notes are NOT matters of degree. 
Certain fundamen¬ 
tal concepts CANNOT be meaningfully understood in terms of co¬ 
existing polarities. 
It is impossible to conceive of light and darkness, 
or, everything and nothing, as joint possibilities. 
They are all true 
OR all false. 
It is absolutely essential that you understand com¬ 
pletely that behavior is erratic until a firm commitment to one or the 
other is made. 


T 3 D 2. 
A firm commitment to darkness or nothingness is impossible. 

Nobody has ever lived who has not experienced some light and 
some of everything. 
This has made everybody really unable to deny 
truth totally, even if he deceives himself in this connection most of 
the time. 
That is why those who live largely in darkness and empti¬ 
ness never find any lasting solace. 
(This really answers B's question 
about whether people return voluntarily.) 

T 3 D 3. 
Innocence is also not a partial attribute. 
It is not a real defense 
UNTIL it is total. 
When it is partial, it is characterized by the same 
erratic nature that holds for other two-edged defenses. 
The partly 

1,7 Mark 16:18 they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall in no wise hurt 
them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. 


158 Nov. 
24, 1965 


1-126 


136 




Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


innocent are apt to be quite stupid at times. 
It is not until their inno¬ 
cence is a genuine viewpoint which is universal in its application 
that it becomes wisdom. 


T 3 D 4. 
Innocent (or true) perception means that you NEVER misper- 
ceive, and ALWAYS see truly. 
More simply, this means that you 
never see what does not exist in reality. 
Whenever you lack confi¬ 
dence in what someone else will do, you are attesting to your belief 
that he is not in his Right Mind. 
This is hardly a miracle-based frame 
of reference. 
It also has the disastrous effect of denying (incorrect 
use) the essentially creative power of the miracle. 
The miracle per¬ 
ceives everything AS IT IS. 
If nothing but the truth exists (and this is 
really redundant T(145) -144 in statement, because what is not true 
CANNOT exist) Right-Minded seeing cannot see ANYTHING BUT 
perfection. 
We have said many times that ONLY what God creates, 
or what man creates with the same will, has any real existence. 
This, 
then, is all that the innocent can see. 
They do not suffer from the de¬ 
lusions of the Separated ones. 


T 3 D 5. 
The way to correct all such delusions is to withdraw your 
faith from them, and invest it ONLY in what is true. 
To whatever 
extent you side with false perception in yourself or others, you are 
validating a basic misperception. 
You CANNOT validate the inva¬ 
lid. 
I would suggest that you voluntarily give up all attempts to do 
so, because they can be only frantic. 
If you are willing to validate 
what is true in everything you perceive, you will make it true for 
you. 


T 3 D 6. 
Remember that we said that truth overcomes ALL error. 
This 
means that if you perceive truly, you are canceling out mispercep¬ 
tions in yourself AND others simultaneously. 
Because you see them 
as they were really created and can really create, you offer them 
your own validation of THEIR truth. 
This is the real healing which 
the miracle actively creates. 


T 3 D 7. 
(Reply to HS question: Is this all? The reason why this is so 
short, despite its extreme importance, is because it is not symbolic. 

This means that it is not open to more than one interpretation.) (146) - 


137 


1-127 



Volume I Text 


145 This means that it is unequivocal. 
It also explains the quotation 
which you have never gotten correctly in complete form before: 

"But this we know, that when He shall appear (or be perceived) we 
shall be like Him for we shall see Him as He is. 
And every man that 
hath this hope in him purifieth himself even as He is pure." 159 Every 
man DOES have the hope that he can see correctly, because the abil¬ 
ity to do so is IN him. 
Man's ONLY hope IS to see things as they 
are). 
T(l47) -146 160 

T 3 E. 
Perception versus Knowledge (Notes 328 5:177) 

T 3 E 1 . 
(On Wed. 
evening, Nov. 
24, HS had sudden flash of illumina¬ 
tion and very much wanted to offer prayer for B., which she did as 
follows: "Jesus, help me see my brother (B.) as he really is, and thus 
release both him and me." HS also thought later: Every time there is 
anything unlovable that crosses one's mind (re sex, possession, etc.) 
you should immediately recognize that you do not want to hurt 
your brother.) On Thurs. 
morning, the prayer for the miracle oc¬ 
curred as follows stated above.) 

T 3 E 2. 
You had a lot of trouble afterwards with the words (which 
are essentially irrelevant) partly because you were dissatisfied with 
yourself at the time, but also because you ARE confused about the 
difference between perception and cognition. 
You will note that we 
have said very little about cognition as yet. 
(Aside: One of the excep¬ 
tions is in the correction formula for fear, which begins with KNOW 
first) The reason is because you must get your perceptions straight¬ 
ened out before you can KNOW anything. 


T 3 E 3. 
To know is to be certain. 
Uncertainty merely means that you 
DON'T know. 
Knowledge is power BECAUSE it is certain, and cer¬ 
tainty is strength. 
Perception is temporary. 
It is an attribute of the 
space-time belief, and is therefore subject to fear or love. 
Mispercep¬ 
tion produces fear, and true perception produces love. 
NEITHER 


159 1 John 3:2-3 Beloved, now are we children of God, and it is not yet made manifest what we shall 
be. 
We know that, if he shall be manifested, we shall be like him; for we shall see him even as he is. 

And every one that hath this hope set on him purifieth himself, even as he is pure. 


160 Friday, Nov. 
26 


1-128 


138 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


produces certainty because all perception varies. 
That is why it is 
NOT knowledge. 
True perception is the BASIS for knowledge, but 
KNOWING is the affirmation of truth. 


T 3 E 4. 
All of your difficulties ultimately stem from the fact that you 
do not recognize, or KNOW, yourselves, each other, or God. 
"Rec¬ 
ognize" means "know again." This means that you knew before. 

(Note that it does not mean SAW before.) You can see in many 
ways, because perception involves different interpretations, and this 
means it is not whole. 
T(l48) -147 The miracle is a way of PERCEIV¬ 
ING, not a way of knowing. 
It is the right answer to a question, but 
you do not ask questions at all when you know. 


T 3 E 5. 
Questioning delusions is the first step in undoing them. 
The 
miracle, or the right answer, corrects them. 
Since perceptions 
CHANGE, their dependence on time is obvious. 
They are subject to 
transitory states, and this implies variability by definition. 
How you 
perceive at any given time determines what you DO, and action 
MUST occur in time. 
Knowledge is timeless because certainty is not 
questionable. 
You KNOW when you have ceased to ask questions. 


T 3 E 6. 
The "questioning mind" perceives itself in time, and there¬ 
fore looks for FUTURE answers. 
The unquestioning mind is closed 
merely because it believes the future and the present will be the 
same. 
This establishes an unchanged state, or stasis. 
This is usually 
an attempt to counteract an underlying fear that the future will be 
WORSE than the present, and this fear inhibits the tendency to ques¬ 
tion at all. 


T 3 E 7. 
Visions are the natural perception of the spiritual eye, but 
they are still corrections. 
B's question about the "spiritual eye" was a 
very legitimate one. 
The "spiritual eye" is symbolic, and therefore 
NOT a device for knowing. 
It IS, however, a means of right percep¬ 
tion, which brings it into the proper domain of the miracle, but NOT 
of revelation. 
PROPERLY speaking, a "vision of God" is a miracle 
rather than a revelation. 
The fact that perception is involved at all 
removes the experience from the realm of knowledge. 
That is why 
these visions do not last. 
T(l49) -148 


139 


1-129 


Volume I Text 


T 3 E 8. 
The Bible instructs you to "KNOW thyself," 161 or BE CER¬ 
TAIN. 
Certainty is always of God. 
When you love someone, you 
have PERCEIVED him as he is, and this makes it possible for you to 
KNOW him. 
But it is not until you RECOGNIZE him that you 
KNOW him. 
Only then are you ABLE to stop asking questions 
about him. 


T 3 E 9. 
While you ask questions about God, you are clearly implying 
that you do NOT know Him. 
162 Certainty does not require action. 

When you say you are ACTING on the basis of sure knowledge, you 
are really confusing perception and cognition. 
Knowledge brings 
MENTAL strength for creative THINKING, but not for right doing. 


T 3 E to. 
Perception, miracles and doing are closely related. 
Knowl¬ 
edge is a result of revelation, and induces only thought (thinking). 

Perception involves the body even in its most spiritualized form. 

Knowledge comes from the altar within, and is timeless because it is 
certain. 
To perceive the truth is not the same as KNOWING it. 
This 
is why B. 
is having so much trouble in what he calls "integrating" 
the notes. 
His tentative perception is too uncertain for knowledge, 
because knowledge is SURE. 
Your perception is so variable that you 
swing from sudden but real knowledge to complete cognitive disor¬ 
ganization. 
This is why B. 
is more prone to irritation, while you are 
more vulnerable to rage. 
He is consistently BELOW his potential, 
while you achieve it at times and then swing very wide of the mark. 

T 3 E ll. 
Actually, these differences do not matter. 
But I thought you 
might be glad to learn that you are much better off with DIFFER¬ 
ENT perceptual problems than you would be if you suffered from 
similar ones. 
This enables each of you to RECOGNIZE (and this is 
the T(150) -149 right word here) that the misperceptions of the other 
are unnecessary. 
It is because you do not KNOW what to do about it 


161 While the Bible arguably so instructs, it doesn’t do it in those words that we can find. 


162 The Urtext manuscript has “him” with no capital. 
However, this pronoun clearly refers to God, the 
Notes has it capitalized, and the general scribal practice is to capitalize pronouns for persons of the 
Trinity. 



1-130 


140 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


that B. 
reacts to yours with irritation, and you respond to his with 
fury. 


T 3 E 12.1 repeat again that if you ATTACK error, you will hurt your¬ 
self. 
You do not RECOGNIZE each other when you attack. 
Attack is 
ALWAYS made on a stranger. 
You are MAKING him a stranger by 
misperceiving him, so that you CANNOT know him. 
It is BECAUSE 
you have made him into a stranger that you are afraid of him. 
PER¬ 
CEIVE him correctly, so that your Soul can KNOW him. 


T 3 E 13. 
Right perception is necessary before God can communicate 
DIRECTLY to his own altars, which he has established in His Sons. 

There he can communicate His certainty, and His KNOWLEDGE 
will bring the peace WITHOUT question. 


T 3 E 14. 
God is not a stranger to His Own Sons, and His Sons are not 
strangers to each other. 
Knowledge preceded both perception and 
time, and will also ultimately replace (or correct for) them. 
This is 
the real meaning of the Biblical account of God as "Alpha and 
Omega, the Beginning and the End." 163 It also explains the quotation 
"Before Abraham WAS, I AM." Perception can and must be stabi¬ 
lized, but knowledge IS stable. 
"Fear God and keep His Command¬ 
ments" is a real scribal error. 
It should read, "KNOW God and ac¬ 
cept His certainty." (This error is why the commandments are all 
negative, in contrast to Christ's statement about "Thou shalt 
love." 164 etc.) There are no strangers in His Creation. 
To create as He 
Created, you can create only what you KNOW and accept as yours. 


T 3 E 15. 
God knows His Children with perfect certainty. 
He Created 
them by knowing them. 
T(l5l) -150 He recognizes them perfectly. 

When they do not recognize each other, they do not recognize Him. 

Brothers can misperceive one another, but they rarely maintain that 


163 John 8:58 Jesus said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I AM.” ; 

Also: Revelation 21:6 And He said to me, “It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning 
and the End. 
I will give of the fountain of the water of life freely to him who thirsts.; 

Also: Revelation 22:13 I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End, the First and the 
Last. 


l64 Matthew 22:37 Jesus said unto him, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy mind.” 


141 


1-131 




Volume I Text 


they do not KNOW each other. 
This is possible only if they maintain 
that they are NOT really brothers. 
The Bible is VERY specific on this 
point. 
T(152) -151 

T 3 F. 
Conflict and the Ego (Notes 339 5:188) 

T 3 F l. 
Most 165 of the abilities man now possesses are only shadows 
of his real strengths. 
The Soul knows, loves, and creates. 
These are 
its unequivocal functions. 
All of the functions of man are equivocal, 
or open to question or doubt. 
This is because he can no longer be 
certain how he will USE them. 
He is therefore incapable of knowl¬ 
edge, because he is uncertain. 
He is also incapable of true loving, 
because he can perceive lovelessly. 
He cannot create surely, because 
perception deceives, and illusions are not pure. 
166 
T 3 F 2. 
Perception did not exist until the Separation had introduced 
degrees, aspects and intervals. 
The Soul has no levels, and ALL con¬ 
flict arises from the concept of levels. 
Wars arise when some regard 
others as if they were on a different level. 
All interpersonal conflicts 
arise from this fallacy. 
Only the levels of the Trinity are capable of 
Unity. 
The levels which man created by the Separation are disas¬ 
trous. 
They cannot BUT conflict. 
This is because one is essentially 
meaningless to another. 
Freud realized this perfectly, and that is 
why he conceived as forever irreconcilable the different levels of his 
psyche. 
They were conflict-prone by definition, because they 
wanted different things and obeyed different principles. 


T 3 F 3. 
In our picture of the psyche, there is an unconscious level, 
which properly consists ONLY of the miracle ability and should be 
under MY direction; and a conscious level, which perceives or is 
aware of impulses from both the unconscious and the supercon¬ 
scious. 
These are the sources of the impulses it receives. 
Conscious¬ 
ness is thus the level of perception, but NOT of knowledge. 
Again, 
to PERCEIVE is NOT to know. 
(In this connection, Cayce is more 
accurate than Freud.) 


165 Saturday 11/27 

166 Notes has 'sure" here instead of ‘pure’ which seems more likely to be correct in the context. 



1-132 


142 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


T 3 F 4. 
Consciousness was the first split that man introduced into 
himself. 
He became a PERCEIVER rather than a creator in the true 
sense. 


T 3 F 5. 
Consciousness is correctly identified as the domain of the 
ego. 
T(l53) -152 Jung was right indeed in insisting that the ego is NOT 
the self, and that the self should be regarded as an achievement. 
He 
did not RECOGNIZE (a term we now understand) that the 
Achievement was God's. 
In a sense, the ego was a man-made at¬ 
tempt to perceive himself as he wished, rather than as he IS. 
This is 
an example of the created/creator confusion we spoke of before. 
He 
can only KNOW himself as he IS, because that is all he can be SURE 
of. 
Everything else IS open to question. 


T 3 F 6. 
The ego is the questioning compartment in the post- 
Separation psyche which man created for himself. 
It is capable of 
asking valid questions, but not of perceiving wholly valid answers, 
because these are cognitive, and cannot BE perceived. 
The endless 
speculation about the meaning of mind has led to considerable con¬ 
fusion because the mind IS confused. 
Only One-Mindedness is 
without confusion. 
A separate, or divided, mind MUST be confused. 

A divided mind is uncertain by definition. 
It HAS to be in conflict 
because it is out of accord with itself. 


T 3 F 7. 
Intrapersonal conflict arises from the same basis as interper¬ 
sonal. 
One part of the psyche perceives another part as on a differ¬ 
ent LEVEL, and does not understand it. 
This makes the parts strang¬ 
ers to each other, WITHOUT RECOGNITION. 
This is the essence of 
the fear-prone condition, in which attack is ALWAYS possible. 


T 3 F 8. 
Man has every reason to feel anxious, as he perceives himself. 

This is why he cannot escape fear until he KNOWS that he DID not 
and CAN not create himself. 
He can NEVER make this mispercep¬ 
tion valid, and when he at last PERCEIVES clearly, he is GLAD HE 
CAN'T. 
His Creation is beyond his own error variance, and this is 
why he MUST eventually choose to heal the Separation. 
T(l54) -153 
T 3 F 9. 
Right-mindedness is not to be confused with the KNOWING 
mind, because it is applicable only to right perception. 
You can be 


143 


1-133 


Volume I Text 


right-minded or wrong-minded, and this is subject to degrees, a fact 
which clearly demonstrates a lack of association with knowledge. 

(No, Helen, this is PERFECTLY clear and DOES follow the previous 
section. 
Neither you nor I is at all confused, even in grammar.) 

T 3 F 10. 
The term "right-mindedness" is properly used as the correc¬ 
tion for wrong-mindedness, and applies to the state of mind which 
induces accurate perception. 
It is miraculous because it heals mis¬ 
perception, and healing is indeed a miracle, in view of how man 
perceives himself. 
Only the sick NEED healing. 
The Soul does not 
need healing, but the mind DOES. 


T 3 F ll. 
Freud gave a very graphic but upside down account of how 
the divisions of the mind arose from the bottom UP. 
Actually, this is 
impossible, because the unconscious cannot create the conscious. 

You cannot create something you can't KNOW. 
Freud was greatly 
worried about this, being VERY bright, though misguided, and at¬ 
tempted to get around it by introducing a number of "borderline" 
areas which merely resulted in fuzziness. 
This was particularly un¬ 
fortunate, because he was capable of going much higher, if he had 
not been so afraid. 
This is why he kept pulling the mind DOWN. 


T 3 F12. 
The ego did NOT arise out of the unconscious. 
A lower- 
order perception cannot create a higher-order one, (which is the way 
you perceive the structure of the psyche if you look at it from the 
bottom UP) because it doesn't understand it. 
But a higher-order per¬ 
ception CAN create a lower-order one by understanding it in terms 
of MISperception. 
T(l55) -154 

T 3 F13. 
Perception ALWAYS involves some misuse of will, because 
it involves the mind in areas of uncertainty. 
The mind is very active 
because it has will-power. 
When it willed the Separation it willed to 
perceive. 
Until it chose to do this, it willed only to know. 
After¬ 
wards, it had to will ambiguously, and the only way out of ambigu¬ 
ity IS clear perception. 


T 3 F14. 
The ego is as frail as Freud perceived it. 
The later theorists 
have tried to introduce a less pessimistic view, but have looked in 
the wrong direction for their hope. 
Any attempt to endow the ego 


1-134 


144 


Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


with the attributes of the Soul, is merely confused thinking. 
Freud 
was more clear-sighted about this, because he knew a BAD thing 
when he perceived it, but he failed to recognize that a bad thing 
cannot exist. 
It is therefore wholly unnecessary to try to get out of it. 

As you very rightly observed yourself, the thing to do with a desert 
is to LEAVE. 


T 3 F 15. 
The mind returns itself to its proper function only when it 
WILLS TO KNOW. 
This places it in the Soul's service, where per¬ 
ception is meaningless. 
The superconscious is the level of the mind 
which wills to do this. 
(Freud was particularly distorted on this 
point, because he was getting too far UP for comfort according to his 
own perception.) But he WAS right in maintaining that the "parts" 
of the psyche cannot be correctly perceived either as TF1INGS or as 
entirely separate. 
(Fie would have thought better if he had said "en¬ 
tirely separated.") 

T 3 F 16. 
The mind DID divide itself when it willed to create its own 
levels AND the ability to perceive them. 
But it could NOT entirely 
separate itself from the Soul, because it is FROM the Soul that it de¬ 
rives its whole power to create. 
Even in miscreating, will is affirm¬ 
ing its source, or it would merely cease to be. 
This is impossible, be¬ 
cause it IS part of the Soul, which God created, and which is there¬ 
fore eternal. 
T(l56) -155 

T 3 F17. 
The ability to perceive made the body possible, because you 
must perceive SOMETFIING, and WITFI something. 
This is why 
perception involves an exchange, or a translation, which knowledge 
does NOT need. 
The interpretive function of perception, (actually, a 
distorted form of creation), then permitted man to interpret the 
body as FIIMSELF, which, although depressing, was a way out of 
the conflict he induced. 
(This has already been covered in some de¬ 
tail.) 

T 3 F18. 
The superconscious, which KNOWS, could not be reconciled 
with this loss of power, because it was incapable of darkness. 
This is 
why it became almost inaccessible to the mind, and entirely inacces¬ 
sible to the body. 
It was PERCEIVED as a threat, because light does 


145 


1-135 


Volume I Text 


abolish darkness by establishing the clear fact that it ISN'T THERE. 

The truth will ALWAYS destroy error in this sense. 
This is not an 
ACTIVE process of destruction at all. 
We have already emphasized 
the fact that knowing does not DO anything. 
It can be PERCEIVED 
as an attacker, but it CANNOT attack. 


T 3 F 19. 
What man perceives as its attack is his own recognition of 
the fact that it can always be REMEMBERED, because it has never 
been destroyed. 
This is not a literal remembering as much as a re¬ 
membering. 
(That is largely for B. 
I wish he would decide to use that 
talent of his constructively. 
He has no idea of how powerful it could 
be. 
Actually, it does come from the unconscious, and is really a dis¬ 
torted form of miraculous perception which he has reduced to word 
twisting. 
Although this can be quite funny, it is still a real waste. 

Maybe he'd care to let me control it, and still use it humorously 
himself. 
He doesn't have to decide it is one OR the other.) T(l57) -156 

T 3 F 20. 
The unconscious should never have been reduced to a "con¬ 
tainer" for the waste products of conflict. 
Even as HE perceives his 
psyche, every level has a creative potential, because nothing man 
creates can wholly lose this. 


T 3 F 21. 
God and the Souls He created remain in surety, and there¬ 
fore KNOW that no miscreation exists. 
Truth cannot deal with un¬ 
willing error, because it does not will to be blocked out. 
But I was a 
man who remembered the Soul and its knowledge. 
Tell B. 
that when 
he refused to misperceive he was indeed behaving as I behaved. 


And as a man, I did not attempt to counteract error with knowledge, 
so much as to CORRECT error from the bottom up. 
I demonstrated 
both the powerlessness of the body AND the power of the mind, by 
uniting MY will with that of my Creator, 167 which naturally remem¬ 
bered the Soul and its own real purpose. 


T 3 F 22.1 cannot unite your will with God's for you. 
But I CAN erase 
all misperceptions from your mind, if you will bring it under my 


167 The Notes begins a new sentence at “by” and in place of the word “which” here has “I brought His 
Light back into the mind. 
I naturally” 


1-136 


146 




Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


guidance. 
ONLY your misperceptions stand in your own way. 

Without them, your own choice is certain. 
Sane perception IN¬ 
DUCES sane choosing. 
The Atonement was an act based on true 
perception. 
I cannot choose for you, but I CAN help you make your 
own right choice. 


T 3 F 23. 
"Many are called but few are chosen" 168 SHOULD read, 
"ALL are called but few choose to listen. 
Therefore, they do not 
choose RIGHT." The "chosen ones" are merely those who choose 
right SOONER. 
This is the real meaning of the celestial speed-up. 

Strong wills can do this NOW. 
And you WILL find rest for your 

Souls. 
169 God knows you only in peace, and this IS your reality. 


T(158)-157 

T 3 F 24. 
(Note that the term "insight", though referring to lofty per¬ 
ception, is not an attribute of knowledge. 
This is why terms like 
"lofty" are meaningless in this context. 
Insight is not the way TO 
knowledge, but it IS a prerequisite FOR knowledge. 
Being of God, 
knowledge has nothing to do with your perceptions at all. 
That is 
why it can only be a gift of God TO you.) T(l59) -158 

T 3 G. 
The Loss of Certainty (Notes 366 5:215) 

Dictated without notes. 
170 

T 3 G l. 
We 171 said before that the abilities which man possesses are 
only shadows of his true abilities. 
The Soul's true functions are 
knowing, loving, and creating. 
The intrusion of the ability to per¬ 
ceive, which is inherently judgmental, was introduced only after the 
Separation. 
No one has been sure of anything since then. 
You will 
also remember that I made it very clear that the Resurrection was 


168 Matthew 20:16 “So the last will be first, and the first last. 
For many are called, but few chosen.” 
Also: Matthew 22:14 “For many are called, but few are chosen.” 

169 Jeremiah 6:16 Thus says the LORD: “Stand in the ways and see, And ask for the old paths, where 
the good way is, And walk in it; Then you will find rest for your souls.” But they said, “We will not 
walk in it.” 

Matthew 11:29 “Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and 
you will find rest for your souls.” 

170 The words “dictated without notes” are handwritten on the top of the page above the date. 
The first 
13 paragraphs of this section are not present in the Notes. 


171 Nov. 
30 [1965] 


147 


1-137 



Volume I Text 


the return to knowledge, which was accomplished by the union of 
my will with the Father's. 


T 3 G 2. 
Since the Separation, the words "create" and "make" are in¬ 
evitably confused. 
When you make something, you make it first out 
of a sense of lack or need, and second, out of a something that al¬ 
ready exists. 
Anything that is 172 made is made for a specific purpose. 

It has no true generalizability. 
When you make something to fill a 
perceived lack, which is obviously why you would make anything, 
you are tacitly implying that you believe in the Separation. 
Knowing 
does not lead to doing, as we have frequently observed already. 


T 3 G 3. 
What appears to be contradictory about the difference be¬ 
tween knowing and perceiving, and Revelation and miracles, is 
again the fallacy that is the root cause of all subsequent errors. 
The 
miracle was associated with perception, and not with knowing. 

However, we also noted that prayer is the medium of miracles, and 
also the natural communication of the Creator and the Created. 

Prayer is always an affirmation of knowledge, not of accurate per¬ 
ception. 
That is why unless perception has entered into it, it calls on 
Revelation. 
T(l60) -159 

T 3 G 4. 
The confusion between your own creation and what you cre¬ 
ate is so profound that it has literally become impossible to know 
anything, because knowledge is always stable. 
It is quite evident 
that human beings are not. 
Nevertheless, they are perfectly stable as 
God created them. 
In this sense, when their behavior is unstable, 
they are obviously disagreeing with God's idea of the Creation. 
This 
is a fundamental right of man, although not one he would care to 
exercise if he were in his Right Mind. 


T 3 G 5. 
The problem that is bothering you most is the fundamental 
question which man continually asks of himself, but which cannot 
properly be directed to himself at all. 
He keeps on asking "himself" 
what he is. 
This implies that the answer is not only one which he 

17 “ The words “that is” are typed between lines, over the words “can be” which are crossed out. 
Thus, 
originally typed “Anything can be made is made” becomes “Anything that is made is made.” This has 
not been located in the Notes. 



1-138 


148 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


knows, but one which is up to him. 
The first part of this statement is 
perfectly true, but the second part is not. 
We have frequently com¬ 
mented on the absolute necessity of correcting all fallacious thinking 
which associates man in any way with his own Creation. 
Man CAN¬ 
NOT perceive himself correctly. 
He has no image at all. 
The word 
"image" is always perception related, and is not a product of know¬ 
ing. 
Images are symbolic, and stand for something else. 
The current 
emphasis on "changing your image" is a good description of the 
power of perception, but it implies that there is nothing to KNOW. 


T 3 G 6. 
Prayer is the medium of miracles, not because God created 
perceptions, but because God created YOU. 
At the beginning of this 
course, we said that YOU are a miracle. 
Therefore, the miracle 
worker is a miracle NOT of his own creation . 
173 Unless perception 
rests on some knowing basis, it is so unstable that it doesn't mean 
anything. 
T(161) -160 Knowing is not open to interpretation, because 
its meaning is its own. 
It is possible to interpret meaning, but this is 
always open to error because it involves the perception of meaning. 

All of these wholly needless complexities are the result of man's at¬ 
tempt to regard himself both as separated and unseparated at the 
same time. 
It is impossible to undertake a confusion as fundamental 
as this without engaging in further confusion. 


T 3 G 7. 
Methodologically, man's mind has been very creative. 
But, as 
always occurs when method and content are separated, it has not 
been utilized for anything but an attempt to escape a fundamental 
and entirely inescapable impasse. 
This kind of thinking cannot re¬ 
sult in a creative outcome, though it has resulted in considerable in¬ 
genuity. 
It is noteworthy, however, that this ingenuity has almost 
totally divorced him from knowledge. 


T 3 G 8. 
Knowledge does not require ingenuity at all. 
When we say 
"the truth shall set you free ," 174 we mean that all this kind of think- 

173 This sentence originally was typed “Therefore, the Creator of the miracle is a miracle NOT of his 
own creation.” The words “the Creator” are crossed out and the word “WORKER” is printed in by 
hand in block capitals. 
This has not been located in the Notes. 


174 John 8:32 “and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 


149 


1-139 



Volume I Text 


ing is a waste of time, but that you are free of the need of engaging 
in it. 
T(162) -161 

T 3 G 9. 
Note again that the functions of the Soul were not referred to 
as abilities. 
This point requires clarification, because abilities are be¬ 
liefs which are BASED on the scarcity fallacy, since they do not 
mean anything apart from within-group comparisons. 
As you your¬ 
self never fail to point out, "nobody has none of an ability, and no¬ 
body has all of it." That is, of course, why the curve never rests on 
the line. 
The clearest implications of relativity, which properly in¬ 
heres in this statement, DEMONSTRATE that abilities are not func¬ 
tions of the Soul. 
The Soul's functions are NOT relative. 
They are 
ABSOLUTE. 
They are OF God and FROM 175 God, and therefore 
God-like. 


T 3 G 10. 
Prayer is a way of asking for something. 
When we said that 
prayer is the medium of miracles, we also said that the only mean¬ 
ingful prayer is for forgiveness, because those who have been for¬ 
given HAVE everything. 
Once forgiveness has been accepted, 
prayer in the usual sense becomes utterly without meaning. 
Essen¬ 
tially, a prayer for forgiveness is nothing more than a request that 
we may be able to recognize something we already have. 


T 3 G 11. 
In electing the ability to perceive instead of the will to know, 
man placed himself in a position where he could resemble his Father 
ONLY by perceiving miraculously. 
But he lost the knowledge that 
he HIMSELF is a miracle. 
MIRACULOUS CREATION was his own 
Source, and also his own real function. 
"God created man in his own 
image and likeness " 176 is correct in meaning, but the words are open 
to considerable misinterpretation. 
This is avoided, however, if "im¬ 
age" is understood to mean "thought," and "likeness" is taken as 

173 The Urtext manuscript is totally illegible, we are just guessing that it is perhaps meant to be 
“FROM.” This is a “dictated without notes” segment so we can’t check the Notes. 
This material was 
not preserved in any other version, either. 


176 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



1-140 


150 





Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


"of a like quality." God DID create the Son in His own Thought, and 
of a quality like to His own. 
There IS nothing else. 


T 3 G 12. 
Perception is impossible WITHOUT a belief in "more" and 
"less." Unless perception, at every level, involves selectivity, it is 
incapable of organization. 
In all types of perception, there is a con¬ 
tinual process of accepting and rejecting, of organizing and reorgan¬ 
izing, and of shifting and changing focus. 
Evaluation is an essential 
aspect of perception, because judgment MUST be made for selec¬ 
tion. 
"Lack of lack" is a concept which is meaningless to a perceiver, 
because the ability to perceive at all RESTS ON lack. 
T(l63) -162 
T 3 G 13. 
What happens to perceptions if there ARE no judgments, 
and there is nothing BUT perfect equality? Perception is automati¬ 
cally useless. 
Truth can only be KNOWN. 
All of it is equally true, 
and knowing any part of it IS to know all of it. 


T 3 G 14. 
Only perception involves partial awareness. 
Knowledge 
transcends ALL of the laws which govern perception. 
Partial 
KNOWLEDGE is impossible. 
It is all One, and has no separate parts, 
(i.e. 
the parts have NOT separated.) This IS the real knowledge. 
You 
who are really one with it need but know YOURSELF and your 
knowledge is complete. 
To know God's miracle is to know Him. 


T 3 G 15. 
Forgiveness is the healing of the perception of separation. 

Correct perception of EACH OTHER is necessary ONLY because 
minds have willed to see themselves AS separate beings. 
Each Soul 
knows God completely. 
This IS the miraculous power of the Soul. 

The fact that each Soul has this power completely is a fact that is en¬ 
tirely alien to human thinking, in which if any ONE has everything, 
there is nothing LEFT. 


T 3 G 16. 
God's miracles are as total as His Thought, because they 
ARE His thoughts. 
God shines in them all with perfect light. 
If they 
recognize this light anywhere, they know it universally. 
Revelation 
cannot be explained, because it IS knowledge. 
Revelation HAP¬ 
PENS. 
It is the only REALLY natural happening, because it reflects 
the nature of God. 
T(l64) -163 


151 


1-141 



Volume I Text 


T 3 G 17. 
As long as perception lasts, prayer has a place. 
Since percep¬ 
tion rests on lack, those who perceive have not totally accepted the 
Atonement and given over themselves to truth. 
Perception IS a 
separated state, and the perceiver DOES need healing. 
Communion, 
not prayer, is the natural state of those who know. 
God and HIS 
miracles are inseparable. 


T 3 G 18. 
All words, at best, are preparatory. 
THE word is really a 
thought. 
No one WORD is universally meaningful, because a word 
is a symbol, but thought is not divisible by creation. 
The original 
name for "thought" and "word" was the same. 
The quotation 
should read "In the beginning was the thought, and the thought was 
with God, and the thought WAS God." How beautiful indeed are 
the thoughts of God, who live in His light. 
Your worth is beyond 
perception because it is beyond doubt. 


T 3 G 19. 
Do not perceive yourself in different lights. 
KNOW yourself 

in the One Light, where the miracle which is you is perfectly clear. 

T(165)-164 

T 3 G 20. 
The 177 prerequisites for therapy must include the following 
conditions: 

T 3 G 21.1. 
The procedure must involve the recognition rather than 
the denial of the importance of thought. 


T 3 G 22. 
2. 
The exact equality of everyone who is involved. 
This 
must include Me. 


T 3 G 23. 
3. 
No one is either therapist or patient. 
(B. 
should add 
"teacher or pupil.") 

T 3 G 24. 
4. 
Above all EVERYONE involved must want to give up 
everything that is NOT true. 
The reason for the negative emphasis 
here is that therapy implies something HAS gone wrong. 
Even 
though the purpose is to correct, those who are ill ARE negative. 



177 12/7/65 is manually handwritten in the top right comer. 
It also includes a typed “1” in the top centre, 
indicating originally this was numbered “page 1.” While not marked “dictated without notes,” since the 
material has not been located in the Notes , and is marked page “1”, it may well have been directly dic¬ 
tated. 
The apparently original pagination runs right to section H 1 which is again numbered “1,” again 
missing from the Notes, and dated 12/10/65. 



1-142 


152 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


T 3 G 25. 
5. 
Therapy is EXACTLY the same as all other forms of mira¬ 
cle-working. 
It has no separate laws of its own. 
All of the points that 
were given for miracles apply to therapy because, UNLESS therapy 
proceeds from miracle-mindedness, it CANNOT heal. 


T 3 G 26. 
6. 
The therapist (hopefully) does have the role of being the 
better perceiver. 
(This is also, again hopefully, true of the teacher.) It 
does not follow that he is the better knower. 
Temporarily, the thera¬ 
pist or teacher can help in straightening out twisted perceptions, 
which is also the only role that I would ever contribute myself. 
All 
therapy should do is try to place EVERYONE involved in the right 
frame of mind to help one another. 
It is essentially a process of true 
courtesy, including courtesy to Me. 
T(l66) -165 

T 3 G 27. 
Any 178 form of mental illness can truthfully be described as 
an expression of viciousness. 
We said before that those who are 
afraid are apt to be vicious. 
If we were willing to forgive other peo¬ 
ple's misperceptions of us, they could not possibly affect us at all. 

There is little doubt that you can explain your present attitudes 179 in 
terms of how people used to look at you, but there is no wisdom in 
doing so. 
In fact, the whole historical approach can justifiably be 
called doubtful. 


T 3 G 28. 
As you have so often said, no one has adopted ALL of his 
parents' attitudes as his own. 
In every case, there has been a long 
process of choice, in which the individual has escaped from those he 
himself vetoed, while retaining those he voted FOR. 
B. 
has not re¬ 
tained his parents political beliefs, in spite of the particular kind of 
newspapers that constituted their own reading matter in this area. 

The reason why he could do this was because he believed he was 
free in this area. 


T 3 G 29. 
There must be some acute problem OF HIS OWN that 
would make him so eager to accept their misperception of his own 


178 12/7/65 

179 The word “absolutes” is crossed out, and the word “attitudes" typed above it. 
This has not been 
located in the Notes. 



153 


1-143 



Volume I Text 


worth. 
This tendency can ALWAYS be regarded as punitive. 
It can¬ 
not be justified by the inequality of the strengths of parents and 
children. 
This is never more than temporary, and is largely a matter 
of maturational and thus physical difference. 
It does not last unless 
it is held onto. 
T(167) -166 180 

T 3 G 30. 
When B's father came to his new office and "destroyed" it, it 
is quite apparent that B. 
MUST have been willing to let it be de¬ 
stroyed. 
The many times that he has commented on this event alone 
would suggest that the extreme importance of this misperception in 
his own distorted thinking. 
Why should anyone accord an obvious 
misperception so much power? There cannot be any real justifica¬ 
tion for it, because even B. 
himself recognized the real problem by 
saying "How could he do this to me?" The answer is HE didn't. 


T 3 G 31. 
B. 
has a very serious question to ask himself in this connec¬ 
tion. 
We said before that the purpose of the Resurrection was to 
"demonstrate that no amount of misperception has any influence at 
all on a Son of God." This demonstration EXONERATES those who 
misperceive, by establishing beyond doubt that they have NOT hurt 
anyone. 
B's question, which he must ask himself very honestly, is 
whether he is willing to demonstrate that his parents have NOT hurt 
him. 
Unless he is willing to do this, he has not forgiven them. 


T 3 G 32. 
The essential goal of therapy is the same as that of knowl¬ 
edge. 
No one can survive independently as long as he is willing to 
see himself through the eyes of others. 
This will always put him in a 
position where he MUST see himself in different lights. 
Parents do 
not create the image of their children, though they may perceive 
T(l68) -167 181 images which they do create. 
However, as we have al¬ 
ready said, you are not an image. 
If you SIDE WITH image-makers, 
you are merely being idolatrous. 


T 3 G 33. 
B. 
has no justification whatever for perpetuating ANY image 
of himself at all. 
He is NOT an image. 
Whatever is true of him is 


180 12/7 [1965] 

181 12/7 [1965] 


1-144 


154 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


wholly benign. 
It is essential that he KNOW this about himself, but 
he cannot know it while he chooses to interpret himself as vulner¬ 
able enough to BE hurt. 
This is a peculiar kind of arrogance, whose 
narcissistic component is perfectly obvious. 
It endows the perceiver 
with sufficient unreal strength to make him over, and then acknowl¬ 
edges the perceiver's miscreation. 
There are times when this strange 
lack of real courtesy appears to be a form of humility. 
Actually, it is 
never more than simple spite. 


T 3 G 34. 
Bill, your parents did misperceive you in many ways, but 
their ability to perceive was quite warped, and their misperceptions 
stood in the way of their own knowledge. 
There is no reason why it 
should stand in the way of yours. 
It is still true that you believe they 
DID something to you. 
This belief is extremely dangerous to your 
perception, and wholly destructive of your knowledge. 
This is not 
only true of your attitudes toward your parents, but also of your 
misuse of your friends. 
You still think that you MUST respond to 
their errors AS IF they were true. 
By reacting self-destructively, you 
are GIVING them approval for their misperceptions. 
T(l69) -168 182 

T 3 G 35. 
No one has the right to change himself according to differ¬ 
ent circumstances. 
Only his actions are capable of appropriate varia¬ 
tion. 
His belief in himself is a constant, unless it rests on perceptual 
acuity rather than knowledge of what he is. 


T 3 G 36. 
It is your DUTY to establish beyond doubt that you are to¬ 
tally unwilling to side with (identify with) anyone's misperceptions 
of you, including your own. 
If you become concerned with totally 
irrelevant factors, such as the physical condition of a classroom, the 
number of students, the hour of the course, and the many elements 
which you may choose to select for emphasis as a basis for misper¬ 
ception, you have lost the knowledge of what ANY interpersonal 
relationship is for. 
It is NOT true that the difference between pupil 
and teacher is lasting. 
They meet IN ORDER to abolish the differ¬ 
ence. 
At the beginning, since we are still in time, they come together 


12/7 [1965] 


155 


1-145 



Volume I Text 


on the basis of inequality of ability and experience. 
The aim of the 
teacher is to give them more of what is temporarily his. 
This process 
has all of the miracle conditions we referred to at the beginning. 
The 
teacher (or miracle worker) gives more to those who have less, 
bringing them closer to equality with him, at the same time gaining 
for himself. 


T 3 G 37. 
The confusion here is only because they do not gain the 
same things, because they do not NEED the same things. 
If they did, 
their respective, though temporary roles would not be conducive to 
mutual profit. 
Freedom from fear can be achieved by BOTH teacher 
and pupil ONLY if they do not compare either their needs or their 
T(170) -169 183 positions in regard to each other in terms of higher and 
lower. 


T 3 G 38. 
Presumably, children must learn from parents. 
What parents 
learn from children is merely of a different order. 
Ultimately, there 
is no difference in order, but this involves only knowledge. 
Neither 
parents nor children can be said to HAVE knowledge, or their rela¬ 
tionships would not exist AS IF they were on different levels. 
The 
same is true of the teacher and the pupil. 
Children have an authority 
problem ONLY if they believe that their image is influenced BY the 
authority. 
This is an act of will on their part, because they are elect¬ 
ing to misperceive the authority and GIVE him this power. 


T 3 G 39. 
A TEACHER with an authority problem is merely a pupil 
who refuses to teach others. 
He wants to maintain HIMSELF in a 
position where he can be misused and misperceived. 
This makes 
him resentful of teaching, because of what he insists it has done to 
him. 


T 3 G 40. 
The ONLY way out of this particular aspect of the desert is 
still to leave. 
The way this is left is to release EVERYONE involved, 
by ABSOLUTELY REFUSING to engage in any form of honoring 
error. 
Neither teacher nor pupil is imprisoned by learning unless he 
uses it as an attack. 
If he does this, he will be imprisoned whether he 


12/7 [1965 


1-146 


156 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


actually teaches or learns, or refuses to be 184 engaged in the process 
at all. 
T(l7l) -170 185 

T 3 G 41. 
The role of a teacher, properly conceived, is one of leading 
himself and others out of the desert. 
The value of this role can 
hardly be underestimated, if only because it was one to which I very 
gladly dedicated my own life. 
I have repeatedly asked MY pupils to 
follow me. 
This means that, to be effective teachers, they MUST in¬ 
terpret teaching as I do. 
I have made EVERY effort to teach you EN¬ 
TIRELY without fear. 
If you do not listen, you will be unable to 
avoid the VERY obvious error of perceiving teaching as a threat. 


T 3 G 42. 
It is hardly necessary to say that teaching is a process whose 
purpose is to produce learning. 
The ultimate purpose of ALL learn¬ 
ing is to abolish fear. 
This is necessary so that knowledge can hap¬ 
pen. 
The role of the teacher is NOT the role of God. 
This confusion is 
all too frequently made, by parents, teachers, therapists, and the 
clergy. 
It is a real misunderstanding of both God and His miracles. 

Any teacher who believes that teaching is fearful CANNOT learn 
because he is paralyzed. 
He also cannot really teach. 


T 3 G 43. 
B. 
was quite right in maintaining that this course is a pre¬ 
requisite for his. 
However, he was really saying much more than 
that. 
The purpose of this course IS to prepare you for knowledge. 
So 
is the only real purpose of ANY legitimate course. 
All that is re¬ 
quired of you as a teacher is to follow Me. 
T(l72) -171 186 
T 3 G 44. 
Whenever anyone decides that he can function only in 
SOME roles but not in others, he cannot BUT be attempting to make 
a compromise which will not work. 
If B. 
is under the misbelief that 
he is coping with the fear problem by functioning as an administra¬ 
tor and as a teacher of interns, but NOT as a teacher of students, he 
is merely deceiving himself. 
He owes himself greater respect. 
There 
is nothing as tragic as the attempt to deceive one's self, because it 


184 The word “be” was inserted to correct the grammar. 


185 12/7 [1965] 

186 12/7 [1965] 


157 


1-147 



Volume I Text 


implies that you perceive yourself as so unworthy that deception is 
more fitting for you than truth. 
Either you can function in all of the 
roles you have properly undertaken to fill, or you cannot function 
effectively in any of them. 
This IS an all or none decision. 
You 
CANNOT make inappropriate level distinctions within this choice. 


You are either capable or not. 
This does not mean that you can DO 
everything, but it DOES mean that you are either totally miracle- 
minded or not. 
This decision is open to NO compromise whatever. 

When B. 
says that he cannot teach, he is making the same mistake 
that we spoke of before, when he acted as if universal laws applied 
to everyone except him. 
This is not only arrogant, but patently un¬ 
true. 
Universal laws MUST apply to him, unless he does not exist. 

We will not bother to argue about this. 
T(l73) -172 187 

T 3 G 45. 
Descartes engaged in a very interesting teaching procedure, 
and one from which he himself learned a great deal. 
He began with 
doubting the existence of everything, except himself. 
He insisted 
that his own existence was not open to doubt, and rebuilt his entire 
thought system on the one premise "I think, therefore I am." It is 
noteworthy that he arrived at accepting the entire system he origi¬ 
nally doubted, solely on the basis of this ONE piece of knowledge. 

There was, however, a distinct shift in his own perception. 
He no 
longer really questioned the reality of what he perceived, because he 
KNEW he was there. 


T 3 G 46. 
We mentioned before that B. 
is not too sure of this, and that 
is why we suggested that he concentrate on "Lord, here I am." 188 A 


187 12/7 [1965] 

188 An interesting page shows up in the Urtext collection bearing the heading “Special Message directly 
to WT” (which likely refers to William Thetford) this may be what the words “Lord, here I am” refer 
to. 
It is as follows: 

“I would like to pray that my will be united with thine, recognizing that thy perfect love will suffice (or 
correct) for my imperfect love. 
I pray that I may accept the Atonement with conviction, recognizing its 
inevitable worth, and my own divine worth as part of this identification with thee. 
I pray that my fear be 
replaced by an active sense of thy love, and thy continual willingness to help me overcome the split, or 
divided will, which is responsible for my difficulty with this. 
I accept the divinity of the messages we 
have received, and affirm my will in both accepting and acting upon the Atonement principle. 


“Here I am, Lord: 

“The major problem that both of you have is the continuing split will, which naturally interferes with 
your true identification. 
To the extent that you hold onto this split, it will take longer to get through and 


1-148 


158 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


teacher is unlikely to be effective unless he begins with BEING 
THERE. 
B, this is not really open to question. 
You will lose all your 
fear of teaching and relating in any form once you know who you 
are. 
There is no point whatever in remaining in the prison of believ¬ 
ing that this is up to you. 
You do NOT exist in different lights. 
It is 
this belief which has confused you about your own reality. 
Why 
would you want to remain so obscure to yourself? T(174) C l 189 

T 3 H. 
Judgment and the Authority Problem. 
(Not present in 
the Notes ) 

T 3 H l. 
We have already discussed the Last Judgment 190 in some 
though insufficient detail. 
After the Last Judgment, there isn't any 
more. 
This is symbolic only in the sense that everybody is much bet¬ 
ter off WITHOUT judgment. 
When the Bible says "Judge not that ye 
be not judged" 191 it merely means that if you judge the reality of 
others at all, you will be unable to avoid judging your own. 
The 
choice to judge rather than know has been the cause of the loss of 
peace. 
Judgment is the process on which perception but not cogni¬ 
tion rests. 
We covered this before in terms of selectivity. 
Evaluation 
was said at that time to be its obvious prerequisite. 


T 3 H 2. 
Judgment ALWAYS involves rejection. 
It is not an ability 
which emphasizes ONLY the positive aspects of what is judged, 
whether it be in or out of the self. 
However, what has been per¬ 
ceived and rejected, (or judged and found wanting) remains in the 
unconscious because it HAS been perceived. 
Watson had a very 
relevant notion of the unconscious in this connection. 
In fact, it was 
so relevant that he dropped it as officially out of accord with Behav¬ 
iorism. 
He was right on both counts. 



will MARKEDLY interfere with your own integration efforts. 
Reliance has to be placed on Me, which 
is sufficient once you do this without distantiation or division in loyalties. 
This will be strengthened 
through a continual affirmation of the goal you both want to achieve, and an awareness of its 
inevitability. 
In this way, you will both perceive and KNOW your true worth, and the importance of 
maintaining a COMPLETE identification.” 

189 12/10/65 

190 Matthew 11:22 But I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment 
than for you. 


191 Matthew 7:1 “Judge not, that ye be not judged.” 


159 


1-149 



Volume I Text 


T 3 H 3. 
One of the illusions from which human perception suffers is 
that what it perceives and judges against has no effect. 
This cannot 
be true, unless man 192 also believes that what his judgment vetoes 
does not exist. 
He evidently does not believe this, or he would not 
have judged against it. 
T(175) C 2 It does not really matter, in the end, 
whether you judge right or wrong. 
Either way, you are placing your 
belief in the unreal. 
This cannot be avoided in any type of judgment, 
because it IMPLIES the belief that reality is yours to choose FROM. 


T 3 H 4. 
Neither of you has any idea of the tremendous release and 
deep peace that comes from meeting yourselves and your brothers 
totally without judgment. 
If you will look back at the earlier notes 
about what you and your brothers ARE, you will realize that judg¬ 
ing them in any way is really without meaning. 
In fact, their mean¬ 
ing is lost to you precisely BECAUSE 193 you ARE judging them. 
All 
uncertainty comes from a totally fallacious belief that you are under 
the coercion of judgment. 
You do not need it to organize your life, 
and you certainly do not need it to organize yourselves. 


T 3 H 5. 
When you look upon knowledge, all judgment is automati¬ 
cally suspended, and this is the process that enables recognition to 
REPLACE perception. 
Man is very fearful of everything he has per¬ 
ceived and refused to accept. 
He believes that because he has re¬ 
fused to accept it, he has lost control over it. 
This is why he sees it in 
nightmares, or in pleasant disguise in what seems to be happier 
dreams. 
Nothing that you have refused to accept can be brought 
into awareness. 
It does NOT follow that it is dangerous. 
But it DOES 
follow that you have made it dangerous. 
T(176) C 3 

T 3 H 6. 
When you feel tired, it is merely because you have judged 
yourself as capable of being tired. 
When you laugh at someone it is 
because you have judged him as debased. 
When you laugh at your¬ 
self, you are singularly likely to laugh at others, if only because you 

192 manuscript has it typed “he”, it is crossed out and the word “MAN” is handwritten in block caps. 

This has not been located in the Notes. 


193 The word “BECAUSE” is handwritten in block capitals. 
This passage has not been located in the 
Notes. 



1-150 


160 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


cannot tolerate being more debased THAN others. 
All of this does 
make you tired, because it is essentially disheartening. 
You are not 
really capable of being tired, but you are very capable of wearying 
yourselves. 


T 3 H 7. 
The strain of constant judgment is virtually intolerable. 
It is a 
curious thing that any ability which is so debilitating should be so 
deeply cherished. 
But there is a very good reason for this. 
(This, 
however, depends upon what you mean by good.) 

T 3 H 8. 
If you wish to be the author of reality, which is totally impos¬ 
sible anyway, then you will insist on holding on to judgment. 
You 
will also use the term with considerable fear and believe that judg¬ 
ment will someday be used against you. 
To whatever extent it IS 
used against you, it is due ONLY to your belief in its efficacy as a 
weapon of defense for your own authority. 


T 3 H 9. 
The issue of authority is really a question of authorship. 

When an individual has a "authority problem," it is ALWAYS be¬ 
cause he believes he is the author of himself, and resents his own 
projection that you share his delusion in this respect. 
He then per¬ 
ceives the situation as one in which two people are literally fighting 
for his own authorship. 
This is the fundamental T(177) C 4 error of all 
those who believe they have usurped the power of God. 


T 3 H 10. 
The belief is very frightening to them, but hardly troubles 
God at all. 
He is, however, eager to undo it, not to punish His chil¬ 
dren, but ONLY because He knows that it makes them unhappy. 

Souls were given their own true authorship, and men 194 preferred to 
remain anonymous when they chose to separate themselves FROM 
their Author. 
The word "authority" has been one of their most fear¬ 
ful symbols ever since. 
Authority has been used for great cruelty, 
because, being uncertain of their true Authorship, men believe that 
their creation was anonymous. 
This has left them in a position 

194 Urtext manuscript has it typed “they”, it is crossed out and “MANY” is handwritten in bock caps, 
and that is crossed out and the word “MEN” is handwritten in block caps. 
This has not been located in 
the Notes. 



161 


1-151 



Volume I Text 


where it SOUNDS meaningful to consider the possibility that they 
must have created themselves. 


T 3 H 11. 
The dispute over authorship has left such uncertainty in the 
minds of man that some people have gone so far as to doubt 
whether they were ever created at all. 
Despite the apparent contra¬ 
diction in this position, it is in one sense more tenable than the view 
that they created themselves. 
At least, it acknowledged the fact 
some TRUE authorship is necessary for existence. 


T 3 H 12. 
Only those who give over all desire to reject can KNOW that 
their own rejection is impossible. 
T(l78) c 5 You have not usurped the 
power of God, but you HAVE lost it. 
Fortunately, when you lose 
something, this does not mean that the something has gone. 
It 
merely means that YOU do not know where it is. 
Existence does not 
depend on your ability to identify it, or even to place it. 
It is per¬ 
fectly possible to look on reality without judgment, and merely 
KNOW it is there. 
By knowing this, you are not doubting its reality 
at all. 


T 3 H 13. 
Peace is a natural heritage of the Soul. 
Everyone is free to 
refuse to accept his inheritance, but he is NOT free to establish what 
his inheritance IS. 
The problem which everyone MUST decide is the 
fundamental question of his own authorship. 
All fear comes ulti¬ 
mately, and sometimes by way of very devious routes, from the de¬ 
nial of Authorship. 
The offense is never to God, but only to the den¬ 
ier himself. 
He has thrown away the reason for his own peace, and 
sees himself only in pieces. 
This strange perception IS an authority 
problem. 
It is also the basis for castration anxiety, since both forms 
of error are fundamentally the same. 


T 3 H 14. 
Neither you nor B. 
can find peace while this authority prob¬ 
lem continues. 
But the truth is still that there IS no problem about 
this. 
There is no man who does not feel that he is imprisoned in 
some way. 
If this has been the result of his own free will, he must 
regard his will as if it were NOT free, or the obviously circular rea¬ 
soning of his own position would be quite apparent. 
T(179) C 6 


1-152 


162 


Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


T 3 H 15. 
Free will MUST lead to freedom. 
Judgment always impris¬ 
ons, because it separates segments of reality according to highly un¬ 
stable scales of desire. 
Wishes are not facts, by definition. 
To wish is 
to imply that willing is not sufficient. 
However, no one really be¬ 
lieves that what is wished is as real as what is willed. 
Instead of 
"seek you first the Kingdom of Heaven" 195 say "Will ye first the 
Kingdom of Heaven," 196 and you have said "I know what I am, and 
I will to accept my own inheritance." T(180) C 7 197 
T 3 H 16. 
It is ESSENTIAL that this whole authority problem be vol¬ 
untarily dismissed at once and for all before B's course. 
Neither of 
you understands how important this is for your sanity. 
You are both 
quite insane on this point. 
(This is not a judgment. 
It is merely a fact. 

(No, Helen, you SHOULD use the word "fact." This is just as much 
a fact as God is. 
A fact is literally a "making" or a starting point. 
You 
DO start from this point, and your thinking is inverted because of 
it.) 

T 3 I. 
Creating versus the Self-Image (Notes 374 5:223) 

T 311. 
Every system of thought MUST have a starting point. 
It be¬ 
gins with either a making or a creating, a difference which we have 
already covered. 
Both are acts of will, except that making involves 
doing, and creating involves active willing. 
Their resemblance lies in 
their power as FOUNDATIONS. 
Their difference lies in what rests 
upon them. 
Both are cornerstones for systems of belief by which 
men live. 


T 312. 
It is a mistake to believe that a thought-system which is based 
on lies is weak. 
NOTHING made by a child of God is without 
power. 
It is absolutely essential that you realize this, because other¬ 
wise you will not understand why you have so much trouble with 
this course, and will be unable to escape from the prisons you have 


155 Matthew 6:33 “But seek ye first his kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be 
added unto you.” 

1% Matthew 6:33 (see above) 

197 12/11/6 


163 


1-153 



Volume I Text 


(made) created for yourselves. 
(The use of creative here was an er¬ 
ror. 
You should have said made for yourself.) T(181) C 8 

T 313. 
You have both made the error of the psychotherapist we de¬ 
scribed in some detail before, and it is particularly serious at this 
time. 
You cannot resolve your authority problem by depreciating 
the power of your minds. 
It 198 CAN hurt you if you misuse it, be¬ 
cause you KNOW its strength. 
You also know that you CANNOT 
weaken it any more than you can weaken God. 


T 314. 
The devil 199 is a frightening concept ONLY because he is 
thought of as extremely powerful and extremely active. 
He is per¬ 
ceived as a force in combat with God, battling Him for possession of 
Souls. 
He deceives by lies, and builds kingdoms of his own, in 
which everything is in direct opposition to God. 
Yet, he ATTRACTS 
men rather than repels them, and they are perceived as willing to 
"sell" him their Souls in return for gifts they KNOW are of no real 
worth at all. 


T 315. 
This makes absolutely no sense. 
The whole picture is one in 
which man acts in a way he HIMSELF realizes is self destructive, 
but which he does NOT WILL to correct, and therefore perceives the 
cause as beyond his control. 


T 316. 
We have discussed the fall or Separation before, but its mean¬ 
ing must be clearly understood, without symbols. 
The Separation is 
NOT symbolic. 
It is an order of reality, or a system of thought that is 
PERFECTLY real in time, though not in Eternity. 
All beliefs are real 
to the believer. 
T(l82) c 9 


198 Urtext manuscript has it typed “It”, the word is crossed out and “THIS” is written above in block 
caps. 
The Notes has it as “It” and joins the last two sentences with “and” instead of breaking them with 
a period. 


199 Revelation 12:7-10 And war broke out in heaven: Michael and his angels fought with the dragon; 
and the dragon and his angels fought, but they did not prevail, nor was a place found for them in heaven 
any longer. 
So the great dragon was cast out, that serpent of old, called the Devil and Satan, who 
deceives the whole world; he was cast to the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. 
Then I heard 
a loud voice saying in heaven, “Now salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the 
power of His Christ have come, for the accuser of our brethren, who accused them before our God day 
and night, has been cast down.” 


1-154 


164 




Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


T 3 I 7. 
The fruit of only ONE tree was "forbidden" to man in his 
symbolic garden. 
200 But God could not have forbidden it, or it could 
not have BEEN eaten. 
If God knows His children, and I assure you 
he does, would he have put them in a position where their own de¬ 
struction was possible? The "tree" which was forbidden was cor¬ 
rectly named "tree of knowledge." Yet God created knowledge, and 
gave it freely to His Creations. 
The symbolism here is open to many 
interpretations, but you may be SURE that any interpretation which 
perceives either God OR His creations as if they were capable of de¬ 
stroying their own Purpose is wrong. 


T 318. 
Eating of the tree of knowledge is a symbolic expression for 
incorporating into the self the ability for self-creation. 
This is the 
ONLY sense in which God and His souls are NOT co-creators. 
The 
belief that they ARE is implicit in the "self concept," a concept now 
made acceptable by its WEAKNESS, and explained by a tendency of 
the self to create an IMAGE of itself. 
Its fear aspect is usually as¬ 
cribed to the "father figure," a particularly interesting idea, in view 
of the fact that nobody means the physical father by the term. 
It re¬ 
fers to an IMAGE of a father in relation to an IMAGE of the self. 


T 319. 
Once again, images are perceived, NOT known. 
Knowledge 
cannot deceive, but perception CAN. 
Man can perceive himself as 
self-creating, but he CANNOT do more than BELIEVE it. 
He CAN¬ 
NOT make it true. 
I told you before that when you finally perceive 
correctly, you can only be GLAD YOU CAN'T. 
T(l83) c 10 But until 
then, the belief that you CAN is the central foundation-stone in your 
thought-system, and all your defenses are used to attack ideas 
which would bring it to light. 


T 31 10 . 
You and B. 
still believe you are images of your own creation. 

You are split with your own Souls on this point, and there is NO 
resolution, because you believe the one thing that is literally IN- 


200 Genesis 2:16-17 And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, “Of every tree of the garden you 
may freely eat; but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that 
you eat of it you shall surely die.” 


165 


1-155 



Volume I Text 


CONCEIVABLE. 
That is why you CANNOT create, and are afraid 
to make or produce. 


T 31 ll. 
You, Helen, are CONSTANTLY arguing about the author¬ 
ship of this course. 
This is NOT humility; it is a REAL authority 
problem. 
You, Bill, really believe that by teaching you are assuming 
a dominant or father role, and that the "father figure" will kill you. 

This is not humility either. 
Castration fears are a particularly dis¬ 
torted reflection of the real basic anxiety, or Separation fear. 


T 3112. 
The mind can make the belief in Separation VERY real and 
VERY fearful. 
And this belief IS the devil. 
It is powerful, active, de¬ 
structive, and clearly in opposition to God, because it literally denies 
His Fatherhood. 
Never underestimate the 201 power of this denial. 

Look at your lives and see what the devil has made. 
But KNOW that 
this making will surely dissolve in the light of truth, because its 
foundation IS a lie. 
T(184) C 11 

T 3113. 
Your creation by God is the only foundation which cannot be 
shaken, because the light is IN it. 
Your starting point IS truth, and 
you MUST return to this Beginning. 
Much has been perceived since 
then, but nothing else has happened. 
That is why your Souls are still 
in peace, even though your minds are in conflict. 


T 3114. 
You have not yet gone back far ENOUGH and that is why 
you become so fearful. 
As you approach the beginning, you feel the 
fear of the destruction of your thought-systems upon you, as if it 
were the fear of death. 
There IS no death, 202 but there IS a belief in 
death. 


T 3115. 
The Bible says that the tree that bears no fruit will be cut off 
and will wither away. 
203 Be glad! The light WILL shine from the true 
Foundation of Life, and your own thought-systems WILL stand cor¬ 
rected. 
They CANNOT stand otherwise. 



21,1 The word “the” is not in the Urtext manuscript. 
It is added to make the sentence grammatical. 
It is 
also present in the Notes , which suggests its omission was inadvertent. 


202 2 Timothy 1:10 But has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel, 

20, John 15:2 “Every branch in Me that does not bear fruit He takes away; and every branch that bears 
fruit He prunes, that it may bear more fruit.” 


1-156 


166 


PROOF 


COPY 



Chapter 3 - Retraining the Mind 


T 3116. 
You who fear salvation are WILLING death. 
Life and death, 
light and darkness, knowledge and perception are irreconcilable. 
To 
believe that THEY can be reconciled is to believe that God and man 
can NOT. 
Only the Oneness of Knowledge is conflictless. 
Your 
Kingdom is not of this world 204 because it was given you from BE¬ 
YOND this world. 
Only IN this world is the idea of an authority 
problem meaningful. 
The world is not left by death but by truth, 
and truth CAN be known by all those for whom the Kingdom was 
created, and for whom it waits. 
T(185) C 12 


John 18:36 Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. 
If My kingdom were of this world, 
My servants would fight, so that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now My kingdom is not from 
here.” 


PROOF 


167 


COPY 


1-157 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 
T 4 A. 
Introduction (Notes 389 5:238) 

T 4 A l. 
(Aside to HS. 
You were both wise and devoted (two words 
which are literally interchangeable in the sense that they truly bring 
on the exchange of one another.) in claiming your scribal functions 
and working so late. 
You HAD committed a serious error against 
your brother, and one who had asked for your help. 
A devoted 
priestess does not do this. 
The Bible says you should go WITH a 
brother twice as far as he asks. 
205 It certainly DOES NOT suggest 
that you set him BACK on his journey. 


T 4 A 2. 
Devotion to a brother CANNOT set YOU back either. 
It can 
ONLY lead to mutual progress. 
The result of genuine devotion is 
inspiration, a word which, properly understood is the OPPOSITE of 
fatigue. 
To be fatigued is to be DIS-spirited, but to be inspired is to 
be IN the spirit. 
To be egocentric IS to be dispirited. 
But to be self- 
centered in the RIGHT sense is to be inspired, or in the Soul. 
The 
truly inspired are enlightened, and cannot abide in darkness. 


T 4 A 3. 
Do not attempt to break God's copyright, because His Au¬ 
thorship alone CAN copy right. 
Your own right authorship does 
NOT lie in remaking His copies, but in creating LIKE Him. 


T 4 A 4. 
Embarrassment is ALWAYS an expression of egocentricity, 
an association which has been made before. 
(Made, NOT created. 

This kind of association is ALWAYS man-made). 
Both of you have 
completed the SCT stem: When I was called on to speak—with—"I 
became embarrassed and COULD NOT SPEAK." T(l86) C 13 This 
should be corrected to "Recognized my Authorship." 

T 4 A 5. 
Tell B. 
that he cannot be embarrassed by his own words 
unless he believes that HE is responsible for them. 
We have already 
corrected "word" to "thought," and he IS free to allocate the author¬ 
ship for his thoughts as he elects. 
He can speak from his Soul or 

'Matthew 5:41 “And whoever compels you to go one mile, go with him two.” 


1-158 


168 





Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


from his ego, precisely as he chooses. 
If he speaks from his Soul, he 
has chosen to "be still and know that I am God." 206 These words are 
inspired, because they come from KNOWLEDGE. 
If he speaks from 
his ego, he is DISCLAIMING knowledge instead of AFFIRMING it, 
and is thus dis-spiriting himself. 


T 4 A 6. 
The dis-spirited have no choice BUT to be narcissistic, and to 
be narcissistic IS to place your faith in the unworthy. 
Your real 
worth IS your divine authorship, and your Soul is its acknowledge¬ 
ment. 
I cannot guide your egos EXCEPT as you associate them with 
your Souls. 


T 4 A 7. 
Attacking misidentification errors is neither MY function nor 
YOURS. 
Destroying the devil is a meaningless undertaking. 

Cervantes 207 wrote an excellent symbolic account of this procedure, 
though he did not understand his own symbolism. 
The REAL point 
of his writing was that his "hero" was a man who perceived himself 
as unworthy because he identified with his ego and perceived its 
weakness. 
He then set about to alter his perception, NOT by correct¬ 
ing his misidentification, but by behaving egotistically. 
T(187)?23 ?C 14 

T 4 A 8. 
Chesterton wrote an excellent description of Cervantes and 
his perception of his "unheroic hero," a view of man which the ego 
tolerates all too frequently, but the Soul NEVER countenances: 

"And he sees across a weary land a straggling road in Spain Up 
which a lean and foolish knight forever rides in vain." 208 

T 4 A 9. 
Do not embark on foolish journeys because they are indeed in 
vain. 
The ego may will them because the ego IS both lean and fool¬ 
ish. 
But the Soul CANNOT embark on them because it is forever 
Unwilling to depart from its Foundation. 
The journey to the cross 
should be the LAST foolish journey for every mind. 
Do not dwell 
upon it, but dismiss it as accomplished. 
If you can accept that as 

M Psalms 46:10 Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the nations, I will be 
exalted in the earth. 


207 Cervantes’s novel “Don Quixote” and its “unhero” Don Juan tilting at windmills is referred to here. 

See: http://www.wizardacademv.com/TheGospelofDonQuixote.asp for an excellent discussion and 
biography 

208 From “ Lepanto ” by G.K. 
Chesterton. 



169 


1-159 




Volume I Text 


YOUR OWN last foolish journey, you are free also to join My Resur¬ 
rection. 
Human living has indeed been needlessly wasted in repeti¬ 
tion compulsion. 
It re-enacts the Separation, the loss of power, the 
foolish journey of the ego in its attempt at reparation, and finally the 
crucifixion of the body, or death. 
Repetition compulsions can be 
endless, unless they are given up by an act of will, or, more properly 
as active creation. 
Do not make the pathetic human error of "cling¬ 
ing to the old rugged cross." 209 The only message of the crucifixion is 
in respect for man's ability to OVERCOME the cross. 
Unless he does 
so, he is free to crucify himself as often as he chooses. 
But this was 
NOT the gospel I intended to offer him. 


T 4 A to. 
We have another journey to undertake, and I hope that, if 
both of you will read these notes carefully, they will help to prepare 
you to undertake it. 
T(l88) c 15 210 

T 4 B. 
Right Teaching and Right Learning (Notes 403 5:252) 

T 4 B 1. 
We have spoken of many different human symptoms, and at 
this level there IS almost endless variation. 
But there is only one 
cause for all of them. 
The authority problem IS "the root of all 
evil." 211 Money is but one of its many reflections, and is a reasonably 
representative example of the kind of thinking which stems from it. 

The idea of buying and selling implies precisely the kind of ex¬ 
change that the Souls cannot understand at all, because their own 
Supply is always abundant, and all their demands are fully met. 


T 4 B 2. 
Every symptom which the ego has made involves a contra¬ 
diction in terms. 
This is because the mind is split between the ego 
and the Soul, so that WHATEVER the ego makes is incomplete and 
contradictory. 
Consider what a "speechless professor" means as a 

209 Christian Hymn; words and music by George Bennard, 1913; http://solosong.net/cross.html 
“On a hill far away stood an old rugged cross 

The emblem of suffering and shame 

How I love that old cross where the dearest and best 

For a world of lost sinners was slain” 

210 Dec. 
26 

211 1 Timothy 6:10 For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil, for which some have strayed 
from the faith in their greediness, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. 



1-160 


170 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


concept. 
It literally means a "nonprofessing professor/' or a "non¬ 
speaking speaker." 

T 4 B 3. 
Untenable positions such as this are the result of the authority 
problem, which, because it accepts the one inconceivable thought as 
its premise, can only produce ideas which are inconceivable. 
B. 
may 
claim (and has certainly done so in the past) that the PROFESSOR¬ 
SHIP was thrust upon him. 
This is not true. 
He wanted it very 
much, and also worked hard to get it. 
He would not have had to 
work so hard either, if he had not misunderstood it. 


T 4 B 4. 
The term "profess" is used quite frequently in the Bible, but 
in a somewhat different context. 
To profess is to identify with an 
idea and offer the idea to others to be THEIR own. 
The idea does 
NOT lessen; it becomes STRONGER. 
T(l89) c 16 The teacher clarifies 
his own ideas and strengthens them BY teaching them. 


T 4 B 5. 
Teacher and pupil, therapist and patient, are all alike in the 
learning process. 
They are in the SAME order of learning, and 
unless they SHARE their lessons they will lack conviction. 
If a 
salesman must believe in the product he sells, how much more must 
a teacher believe in the ideas which he professes. 
But he needs an¬ 
other condition; he must also believe in the students to whom he 
offers his ideas. 


T 4 B 6. 
B. 
could not be afraid to teach unless he still believes that in¬ 
teraction means loss, and that learning means separation. 
He stands 
guard over his own ideas, because he wants to protect his thought- 
system as it is, and learning MEANS change. 
Change is always fear¬ 
ful to the separated, because they cannot conceive of it as a change 
toward HEALING the separation. 
They ALWAYS perceive it as a 
change for further separation, because separation WAS their first 
experience of change. 


T 4 B 7. 
Bill, your whole fear of teaching is nothing but an example of 
your own intense separation anxiety, which you have handled with 
the usual series of mixed defenses in the combined pattern of attack 
on truth and defense of error, which characterizes ALL ego¬ 
thinking. 



171 


1-161 


Volume I Text 


T 4 B 8. 
You insist that if you allow no change to enter into your EGO, 
your SOUL will find peace. 
This profound confusion is possible only 
if one maintains that the SAME thought-system can stand on two 
foundations. 
T(190) C 17 

T 4 B 9. 
NOTHING can reach the Soul from the ego, and nothing 
FROM the Soul can strengthen the ego, or reduce the conflict within 
it. 
The ego IS a contradiction. 
Man's self and God's Self ARE in op¬ 
position. 
They are opposed in creation, in will, and in outcome. 


They are fundamentally irreconcilable because the Soul cannot per¬ 
ceive, and the ego cannot know. 
They are therefore NOT IN COM¬ 
MUNICATION, and can never BE in communication. 


T 4 B 10. 
Nevertheless the ego can learn, because its maker can be 
misguided, but CANNOT make the totally lifeless out of the life- 
given. 
The Soul need not be taught, but the ego MUST. 
The ultimate 
reason why learning or teaching is perceived as frightening is be¬ 
cause true learning DOES lead to the relinquishment (NOT destruc¬ 
tion) of the ego to the light of the Soul. 
This is the change the ego 
MUST fear, because it does not share my charity. 


T 4 B ll. 
My lesson was like yours, and because I learned it I can 
teach it. 
I never attack your egos (in spite of H's strange beliefs to 
the contrary), but I DO try to teach them how their thought-systems 
have arisen. 
When I remind you of your TRUE Creation, your egos 
cannot BUT respond with fear. 


T 4 B 12. 
Bill, teaching and learning are your greatest strengths now, 
because you MUST change your mind and help others change 
theirs. 
It is pointless to refuse to tolerate change or changing because 
you believe that you can demonstrate by doing so that the Separa¬ 
tion never occurred. 
The dreamer who doubts the reality of his 
dream while he is still dreaming it is not really healing the level- 
split. 
T(191) C 18 

T 4 B 13. 
You HAVE dreamed of a separated ego, and you HAVE be¬ 
lieved in a world which rested upon it. 
This is very real to you. 
You 
cannot undo this by doing nothing and not changing. 



1-162 


172 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


T 4 B 14. 
If you are willing to renounce the role of guardians of your 
thought-systems and open them to me, I will correct them very gen¬ 
tly, and lead you home. 
Every good teacher hopes to give his stu¬ 
dents so much of his own thinking that they will one day no longer 
need him. 
This is the one real goal of the parent, teacher, and thera¬ 
pist. 
This goal will not be achieved by those who believe that they 
will LOSE their child or pupil or patient if they succeed. 


T 4 B 15. 
It is IMPOSSIBLE to convince the ego of this, because it goes 
against all of its own laws. 
But remember that laws are set up to 
protect the continuity of the system in which the law-maker be¬ 
lieves. 
It is natural enough for the ego to try to protect itself, once 
YOU have made it. 
But it is NOT natural for YOU to want to obey 
its laws unless YOU believe in them. 


T 4 B 16. 
The ego cannot make this choice because of the nature of its 
origin. 
But YOU can, because of the nature of YOURS. 
Egos can 
clash in any situation, but Souls cannot clash at all. 
If you perceive a 
teacher as merely a "larger ego," you WILL be afraid, because to 
ENLARGE an ego IS to increase separation anxiety. 
Do not engage 
in this foolishness. 
Bill. 
I will teach with you and live with you, if 
you will think with me. 
T(192) C 19 

T 4 B 17. 
But my goal will always be to absolve you finally from the 
need for a teacher. 
This is the OPPOSITE of the ego-oriented 
teacher's goal. 
He is concerned with the effect of HIS ego on OTHER 
egos, and he therefore interprets their interaction as a means of ego 
preservation. 
This is no less true if he is afraid to teach than if he is 
frankly out to dominate through teaching. 
The form of the symptom 
is only a reflection of his particular way of handling the separation 
anxiety. 


T 4 B 18. 
ALL separation anxiety is a symptom of a continuing will to 
remain separated. 
This cannot be repeated too often because you 
have NOT learned it. 
Bill, you are afraid to teach ONLY because you 
are afraid of the impression your image of yourself will make ON 
OTHER IMAGES. 
You believe that their APPROVAL of your image 
will exalt it, but also that your separation anxiety will be increased. 



173 


1-163 


Volume I Text 


You also believe that their DISAPPROVAL of it will lessen the sepa¬ 
ration anxiety, but at the cost of depression. 


T 4 B 19. 
1 would not be able to devote myself to teaching if I believed 
either of these ideas, and YOU will not be a devoted teacher yourself 
as long as you maintain them. 
I am constantly being perceived as a 
teacher either to be exalted or rejected, but I do not accept either per¬ 
ception for myself. 


T 4 B 20. 
Your own worth is NOT established by your teaching. 
Your 
worth was established by God. 
As long as you dispute this, EVERY¬ 
THING you do will be fearful, and particularly any situation which 
lends itself easily to the superior-inferior fallacy. 
Teachers must be 
patient, and repeat their lessons until they are learned. 
I am willing 

to do so, because I have no right to set your learning limits for you. 

T(193) C 20 

T 4 B 21. 
Once again,—NOTHING you do, or think, or will, or make 
is necessary to establish your worth. 
This point IS NOT DEBAT¬ 
ABLE except in delusions. 
Your ego is NEVER at stake because God 
did not create it. 
Your Soul is never at stake because He DID. 
Any 
confusion on this point IS a delusion, and no form of devotion is 
possible as long as this delusion lasts. 


T 4 B 22. 
Bill, if you will to be a devoted teacher rather than an ego¬ 
centric one, you will not be afraid. 
The teaching situation IS fearful if 
it is misused as an ego involvement. 
If you become afraid, it is BE¬ 
CAUSE you are using it this way. 
But the devoted teacher perceives 
the situation AS IT IS, and NOT as HE wills it. 
He does not see it as 
dangerous because HE is not exploiting it. 


T 4 B 23. 
The ego tries to exploit ALL situations into forms of praise 
for itself in order to overcome its doubts. 
It will be doubtful forever, 
or better, as long as you believe in it. 
You who made it CANNOT 
trust it, because you KNOW it is not real. 
The ONLY sane solution is 
not to try to change reality, which is indeed a fearful attempt, but to 
see it as it is. 
YOU are part of reality, which stands unchanged be¬ 
yond the reach of your ego, but within easy reach of your Soul. 



1-164 


174 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


T 4 B 24. 
Bill, again I tell you that when you are afraid, be still and 
KNOW that God is real and YOU are His beloved son in whom he is 
well pleased. 
212 Do not let your ego dispute this, because the ego 
cannot know what is as far beyond its reach as you are. 
God is NOT 
the author of fear. 
213 YOU are. 
T(l94) c 21 You have willed, therefore, 
to create unlike Him, and you have made fear for yourselves. 


T 4 B 25. 
You are not at peace, because you are not fulfilling your 
function. 
God gave you a very lofty responsibility which you are not 
meeting. 
You KNOW this, and you are afraid. 
But your egos have 
chosen to be afraid INSTEAD of meeting it. 
When you awaken you 
will not be able to understand this, because it is literally incredible. 


T 4 B 26. 
DO NOT BELIEVE THE INCREDIBLE NOW. 
Any attempt 
to increase its believableness is merely to postpone the inevitable. 

The word "inevitable" is fearful to the ego, but joyous to the Soul. 

God IS inevitable and you CANNOT avoid Him any more than He 
can avoid YOU. 


T 4 B 27. 
The ego is afraid of the Soul's joy, because once you have 
experienced this, you will withdraw all protection from your ego 
and become totally without investment in fear. 
Your investment is 
great now, because fear is a witness to the Separation, and your ego 
rejoices when you witness to it. 


T 4 B 28. 
Leave it behind. 
Do not listen to it, and do not preserve it. 

Listen only to God, who is as incapable of deception as are the Souls 
he created. 
As teachers and therapists, release yourselves and re¬ 
lease others. 
Do not present a false and unworthy picture of your¬ 
selves TO others, or accept such a picture OF them yourselves. 


T 4 B 29. 
The ego has built a shabby and unsheltering home for you, 
because it cannot build otherwise. 
Do not try to make this impover- 

212 Psalm 46:10 Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth! ; Also: Matthew 17:5 While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed 
them; and suddenly a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased. 
Hear Him!” 

213 1 Corinthians 14:33 For God is not the author of confusion but of peace, as in all the churches of 
the saints. 



175 


1-165 



Volume I Text 


ished house stand. 
214 ITS weakness IS your strength. 
215 Only God 
could make a home that was worthy of His Creations, who have 
chosen to leave it empty by their own dispossession. 
T(l95) C 22 

T 4 B 30. 
His Home will stand forever, and is ready for you when you 
choose to enter. 
Of this you can be wholly certain. 
God is as incapa¬ 
ble of creating the perishable as your ego is of making the eternal. 


T 4 B 31. 
Of your egos you can do nothing to save yourselves or oth¬ 
ers. 
But of your Souls you can do everything for the salvation of 
both. 
216 Humility is a lesson for the ego, not for the Soul. 
The Soul is 
beyond humility, because it recognizes its radiance, and gladly 
sheds its light everywhere. 


T 4 B 32. 
The meek shall inherit the earth 217 because their egos are 
humble, and this gives them better perception. 
The Kingdom of 
Heaven is the right of the Soul, whose beauty and dignity are be¬ 
yond doubt, beyond perception, and stand forever as the mark of 
the love of God for His Creations, who are wholly worthy of Him 
and ONLY of Him. 
Nothing else is sufficiently worthy to be a gift 
for a creation of God Himself. 


T 4 B 33.1 will substitute for your ego if you will, but NEVER for your 
Soul. 
A father can safely leave a child with an elder brother who has 
shown himself responsible, but this involves no confusion about the 
child's origin. 
The brother can protect the child's body and his ego, 
which are very closely associated, but he does not confuse HIMSELF 


214 Matthew 7:24-27. 
“Therefore whoever hears these sayings of Mine, and does them, I will liken him 
to a wise man who built his house on the rock: and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds 
blew and beat on that house; and it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock. 
But everyone who hears 
these sayings of Mine, and does not do them, will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand: 
and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house; and it fell. 
And 
great was its fall.” 

215 2 Corinthians 12:9 And He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made 
perfect in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of 
Christ may rest upon me. 


216 John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do 
nothing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like 
manner.” 

217 Psalm 37:11 But the meek shall inherit the earth, And shall delight themselves in the abundance of 
peace. 


Matthew 5:5 “Blessed are the meek, For they shall inherit the earth.” 


1-166 


176 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


with the father because he does this, although the child may. 
T(196) C 
23 

T 4 B 34. 
The reason why I can be entrusted with YOUR body and 
YOUR egos is simply because this enables YOU not to be concerned 
with them, and ME to teach you their unimportance. 
I could not un¬ 
derstand their importance to YOU if I had not once been tempted to 
believe them myself. 
218 Let us undertake to learn this lesson to¬ 
gether, so we can also be free of them together. 


T 4 B 35. 
1 need devoted teachers as much as I need devoted priest¬ 
esses. 
They both heal the mind, and that is always my own aim. 
The 
Soul is far beyond the need of your protection OR mine. 


T 4 B 36. 
The Biblical quotation should read "In this world you need 
NOT have tribulation BECAUSE I have overcome the world." 219 
THAT is why you should "be of good cheer." 

T 4 B 37. 
B's course was very carefully chosen, because "abnormal 
psychology" IS ego psychology. 
This is precisely the kind of content 
which should never be taught FROM the ego whose abnormality 
should be lessened by teaching, not increased. 
You, Bill, are particu¬ 
larly well suited to perceive this difference, and can therefore teach 
this course as it should be taught. 
Most teachers have an unfortu¬ 
nate tendency to teach the COURSE abnormally, and many of the 
students are apt to suffer considerable perceptual distortion because 
of their own authority problem. 



218 Matthew 4:1-11 Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil. 

And when He had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterward He was hungry. 
Now when the tempter 
came to Him, he said, “If You are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread.” But He 
answered and said, “It is written, “Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds 
from the mouth of God.” Then the devil took Him up into the holy city, set Him on the pinnacle of the 
temple, and said to Him, “If You are the Son of God, throw Yourself down.” For it is written: “He shall 
give His angels charge over you,” and, “In their hands they shall bear you up, Lest you dash your foot 
against a stone.” Jesus said to him, It is written again, “You shall not tempt the LORD your God.” 
Again, the devil took Him up on an exceedingly high mountain, and showed Him all the kingdoms of 
the world and their glory. 
And he said to Him, “All these things I will give You if You will fall down 
and worship me.” Then Jesus said to him, “Away with you, Satan! For it is written, “You shall worship 
the LORD your God, and Him only you shall serve.” Then the devil left Him, and behold, angels came 
and ministered to Him. 


219 John 16:33 “These things I have spoken to you, that in Me you may have peace. 
In the world you 
will have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.” 


177 


1-167 



Volume I Text 


T 4 B 38. 
Your teaching assignment (and I assure you it IS an assign¬ 
ment) will be to present perceptual distortions without either engag¬ 
ing in them yourself, or encouraging your students to do so. 
This 
interpretation of your role and theirs is too charitable to induce fear. 

T(197) C 24 If you adhere to this role, you will both engender and ex¬ 
perience hope, and you will inspire rather than dispirit the future 
teachers and therapists I am entrusting to you. 


T 4 B 39.1 promise to attend myself, and you should at least credit 
with me with some dependability in keeping my own promises. 
I 
never make them lightly, because I know the need my brothers have 
for trust. 


T 4 C. 
The Ego and False Autonomy (Notes 439 6:3) 

T 4 c 1. 
Bill has asked lately how the mind could ever have made the 
ego. 
This is a perfectly reasonable question; in fact, the best question 
either of you could ask. 
There is no point in giving an historical an¬ 
swer, because the past does not matter in human terms, and history 
would not exist if the same errors were not being repeated in the 
present. 
B. 
has often told you that your thinking is too abstract at 
times, and he is right. 
Abstraction DOES apply to knowledge, be¬ 
cause knowledge is completely impersonal, and examples are ir¬ 
relevant to its understanding. 
Perception, however, is always spe¬ 
cific, and therefore quite concrete. 


T 4 c 2. 
Perceptual distortions are not abstractions. 
They are merely 
confusions. 
Each man makes one ego for himself, although it is sub¬ 
ject to enormous variation because of its instability, and one for eve¬ 
ryone he perceives, which is equally variable. 
Their interaction IS a 
process which literally alters both, because they were not made ei¬ 
ther BY or WITH the unalterable. 
T(l98) c 25 

T 4 C 3. 
It is particularly important to realize that this alteration can 
and does occur as readily when the interaction takes place IN THE 
MIND as when it involves physical presence. 
THINKING about an¬ 
other ego is as effective in changing relative perception as is their 
physical interaction. 
There could be no better example of the fact 


1-168 


178 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


that the ego is an idea, though not a reality-based thought. 
Your 
own present state is the best concrete example B. 
could have of how 
the mind could have made the ego. 
You DO have real knowledge at 
times, but when you throw it away it is as if you never had it. 
This 
willfulness is so apparent that B. 
need only perceive it to see that is 
DOES happen. 
If it can occur that way in the present, why should he 
be surprised that it occurred that way in the past? All psychology 
rests on the principle of continuity of behavior. 
Surprise is a reason¬ 
able response to the unfamiliar, but hardly to something that has 
occurred with such persistence. 


T 4 c 4. 
An extreme example is a good teaching aid, not because it is 
typical, but because it is clear. 
The more complex the material, the 
clearer the examples should be for teaching purposes. 
(Bill, remem¬ 
ber that for your own course, and do not avoid the dramatic. 
It 
holds the student's interest precisely because it is so apparent that it 
CAN be readily perceived.) But, as we have said before, all teaching 
devices in the hands of good teachers are aimed at rendering them¬ 
selves unnecessary. 
I would therefore like to use your present state 
as an example of how the mind can work, provided you both fully 
recognize that it need not work that way. 
T(l99) c 26 1 NEVER forget 
this myself, and a good teacher shares his own ideas, which he him¬ 
self believes. 
Otherwise, he cannot really "profess" them, as we used 
the term before. 


T 4 C 5. 
With full recognition of its transitory nature, (a recognition 
which I hope you both share), H. 
offers a very good teaching exam¬ 
ple of alternations between Soul and ego, with concomitant varia¬ 
tion between peace and frenzy. 
In answer to B's question, it is per¬ 
fectly apparent that when she is ego-dominated, she DOES NOT 
KNOW her Soul. 
Her abstract ability, which is perfectly genuine 
and does stem from knowledge, cannot help her because she has 
turned to the concrete which she cannot handle abstractly. 
Being 
incapable of appropriate concreteness perceptually, because her ego 
is not her natural home, she suffers from its intrusions, but NOT 
from complete lack of knowledge. 



179 


1-169 


Volume I Text 


T 4 C 6. 
The result is a kind of "double vision", which would have 
produced an actual diplopia, if she had not settled for nearsighted¬ 
ness. 
This was an attempt to see the concrete more clearly through 
the ego's eyes, without the "interference" of the longer range. 
Her 
virtual lack of astigmatism is due to her real efforts at objectivity 
and fairness. 
She has not attained them, or she would not be near¬ 
sighted. 
But she HAS tried to be fair with what she permitted herself 
to see. 
T(200) C 27 

T 4 C 7. 
Why are you surprised that something happened in the dim 
past, when it is so clearly happening right now? You forget the love 
that even animals have for their own offspring, and the need they 
feel to protect them. 
This is because they regard them as part of 
themselves. 
No one disowns something he regards as a very real 
part of himself. 
Man reacts to his ego much as God does to His 
Souls, -- with love, protection, and great charity. 
The reaction of 
man to the self he made is not at all surprising. 
In fact, it duplicates 
in many ways the way he will one day react to his real creations, 
which are as timeless as he is. 


T 4 C 8. 
The question is not HOW man responds toward his ego, but 
only what he believes he IS. 
Again, belief is an ego-function, and as 
long as your origin is open to belief at all, you ARE regarding it 
from an ego viewpoint. 
That is why the Bible quotes me as saying, 
"Ye believe in God, believe also in me." 220 Belief DOES apply to me, 
because I am the teacher of the ego. 
When teaching is no longer nec¬ 
essary, you will merely know God. 


T 4 c 9. 
Belief that there IS another way is the loftiest idea of which 
ego-thinking is capable. 
This is because it contains a hint of recogni¬ 
tion that the ego is NOT the self. 
Helen always had this idea, but it 
merely confused her. 
B., you were more capable of a long-range 
view, and that is why your eyesight is good. 
But you were willing to 
see because you utilized judgment against what you saw. 
This gave 

~ 2fl John 14:1 “Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe 
also in me.” 


1-170 


180 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


you clearer perception than Helen's, but cut off the cognitive level 
more deeply. 
That is why you believe that you never had knowl¬ 
edge. 
T(201) C 28 

T 4 C 10. 
Repression HAS been a stronger mechanism in your own 
ego defense, and that is why you find her shifts so hard to tolerate. 

Willfulness is more characteristic of her, and that is why she has less 
sense than you do. 
It is extremely fortunate, temporarily, that the 
particular strengths you will both develop and use are precisely 
those which the other must supply now. 
You who will be the 
strength of God are quite weak, and you who will be God's help are 
clearly in need of help. 
What better plan could have been devised to 
prevent the intrusion of the ego's arrogance on the outcome? 

T 4 C 11. 
Undermining the foundation of an ego's thought-system 
MUST be perceived as painful, even though this is anything but 
true. 
Babies scream in rage if you take away a knife or a scissors, 
even though they may well harm themselves if you do not. 
The 
speedup has placed you both in the same position. 


T 4 c 12. 
You are NOT by any means prepared, and in this sense you 
ARE babies. 
You have no sense of real self-preservation and are very 
likely to decide that you need precisely what would hurt you most. 

Whether you know it now or not, however, you both HAVE willed 
to cooperate in a concerted and very commendable effort to become 
both harmLESS and helpFUL, two attributes which MUST go to¬ 
gether. 
Your attitudes, even toward this, are necessarily conflicted, 
because ALL attitudes are ego-based. 
T(202) c 29 
T 4 C 13. 
This will not last. 
Be patient awhile, and remember what we 
have said once before; the outcome is as certain as God! Helen used 
to perceive the quotation "To him that hath shall be given" 221 as a 
paradox that bordered on the ironic. 
She also had a similar reaction 
to another related one: "Faith is the gift of God." 222 We have re- 


2 "' Matthew 13:12 “For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance: but 
whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken away even that he hath. 


1 Corinthians 12:9 “To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of 
healing by the same Spirit;” 


181 


1-171 



Volume I Text 


interpreted both of these statements before, but perhaps we can 
make them even clearer now. 


T 4 C 14. 
Only those who have a real and lasting sense of abundance 
can be truly charitable. 
This is quite obvious when you consider the 
concepts involved. 
To be able to give anything implies that you can 
do without it. 
Even if you associate giving with sacrifice, you still 
give only because you believe you are somehow getting something 
better so that you can do without the thing you give. 


T 4 c 15. 
"Giving to get" is an inescapable law of the ego, which AL¬ 
WAYS evaluates itself in relation to others' egos, and is therefore 
continually preoccupied with the scarcity principle which gave rise 
to it. 
This IS the meaning of Freud's "pleasure principle." Freud was 
the most accurate "ego psychologist" we ever had, although he 
would not have preferred this description himself. 
His ego was a 
very weak and deprived concept, which could function ONLY as a 
thing in need. 


T 4 c 16. 
The "reality principle" of the ego is not real at all. 
It is forced 
to perceive the "reality" of other egos, because it CANNOT establish 
the reality of itself. 
In fact, its whole perception of other egos AS real 
is ONLY an attempt to convince itself that IT is real. 
T(203) C 30 

T 4 C 17. 
"Self esteem," in ego terms, means nothing more than that 
the ego has deluded itself into accepting its reality and is therefore 
temporarily less predatory. 
This "self esteem" is ALWAYS vulner¬ 
able to stress, a term which really means that a condition has arisen 
in which the delusion of reality of the ego is threatened. 
This pro¬ 
duces either ego-deflation or ego-inflation, resulting in either with¬ 
drawal or attack. 
The ego literally lives by comparisons. 
This means 
that equality is beyond its grasp, and charity becomes impossible. 


T 4 c 18. 
The ego NEVER gives out of abundance, because it was 
made as a SUBSTITUTE for it. 
This is why the concept of GETTING 
arose in the ego's thought-system. 
All appetites are "getting" 
mechanisms representing ego needs to confirm itself. 
This is as true 
of bodily appetites as it is of the so-called "higher" ego needs. 
Bod¬ 
ily appetites are NOT physical in origin, because the ego regards the 


1-172 


182 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


body as its home, and DOES try to satisfy itself through the body. 

But the IDEA that this is possible is a decision of the ego, which is 
completely confused about what is really possible. 
This accounts for 
its essential erraticness. 


T 4 C 19. 
Consider the inevitable confusion which MUST arise from a 
perception of the self which responds: When I was completely on 
my own I "had no idea what was possible." T(204) C 31 The ego DOES 
believe it is completely on its own, which is merely another way of 
describing how it originated. 
This is such a fearful state that it can 
only turn to other egos, and unite with them in a feeble attempt at 
identification, or attack them in an equally feeble show of strength. 

The ego is free to complete the stem: "When I was completely on my 
own" in any way it chooses, but it is NOT free to consider the valid¬ 
ity of the premise itself, because this premise is its FOUNDATION. 

The ego IS the belief of the mind that it is completely on its own. 


T 4 c 20. 
The ego's ceaseless attempts to gain the Soul's acknowl¬ 
edgement and thus establish its own existence are utterly useless. 

The Soul in its knowledge is unaware of the ego. 
It does NOT attack 
the ego. 
It merely cannot conceive of it at all. 
While the ego is 
equally unaware of the Soul, it DOES perceive itself as rejected by 
something which is greater than itself. 
This is why self-esteem in ego 
terms MUST be a delusion. 


T 4 c 21. 
The creations of God do not create myths, but the creative 
efforts of man can turn to mythology, but only under one condition. 

What man then makes is no longer creative. 
Myths are entirely per¬ 
ceptions and are so ambivalent in form, and so characteristically 
good and evil in nature that the most benevolent of them is not 
without fearful components, if only in innuendo. 
T(205) C 32 Myths 
and magic are closely associated, in that myths are usually related to 
the ego origins, and magic to the powers which the ego ascribes to 
itself. 
Every mythological system includes an account of "the crea¬ 
tion," and associates this with its particular perception of magic. 


T 4 C 22. 
The "battle for survival" is nothing more than the ego's 
struggle to preserve itself and its interpretation of its own begin- 


183 


1-173 


Volume I Text 


ning. 
This beginning is always associated with physical birth, be¬ 
cause nobody maintains that the ego existed before that point in 
time. 
The religiously ego-oriented tend to believe that the Soul ex¬ 
isted before, and will continue to exist afterwards, after a temporary 
lapse into ego-life. 
Some actually believe that the Soul will be pun¬ 
ished for this lapse, even though in reality it could not possibly 
know anything about it. 


T 4 c 23. 
The term "salvation" does NOT apply to the Soul, which is 
not in danger and does not need to be salvaged. 
Salvation is nothing 
more that "right-mindedness" which is NOT the one-mindedness of 
the Soul, but which must be accomplished before one-mindedness 
can be restored. 
Right-mindedness dictates the next step automati¬ 
cally, because right perception is uniformly without attack, so that 
wrong-mindedness is obliterated. 
The ego cannot survive without 
judgment, and is laid aside accordingly. 
The mind then has only 
ONE direction in which it can move. 
T(206) C 33 
T 4 C 24. 
The directions which the mind will take are always auto¬ 
matic, because they cannot BUT be dictated by the thought-system 
to which it adheres. 
Every thought-system has INTERNAL consis¬ 
tency, and this does provide a basis for the continuity of behavior. 

However, this is still reliability and NOT validity. 
Reliable behavior 
is a meaningful perception, as far as ego thinking goes. 
However, 
VALID behavior is an expression which is inherently contradictory, 
because validity is an END, and behavior is a MEANS. 
These cannot 
be combined logically, because when an end has been attained, the 
means for its attainment are no longer meaningful. 


T 4 C 25. 
Test constructors recognize that there are different kinds of 
validity, and also that they are of different orders. 
This means that 
they do not mean truth and do not pretend to mean it. 
Test validity 
can be judged by logic, by theory, and by practice, each being re¬ 
garded as a different dimension. 
In each case, the amount of confi¬ 
dence is expressed in some form of percentage, either quantitatively, 
or merely in terms of "high," moderate, and low. 
But a hypothesis is 
tested as either true or false, to be accepted or rejected accordingly. 



1-174 


184 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


If it is shown to be true it becomes a fact, after which no one at¬ 
tempts to evaluate it unless its status AS fact is questioned. 


T 4 c 26. 
EVERY idea which the ego has accorded the status of fact is 
questionable, because facts are in the realm of knowledge. 
Confus¬ 
ing realms of discourse is a thinking error which philosophers have 
recognized for centuries. 
Psychologists are generally quite deficient 
in this respect, as are many theologians. 
Data from one realm of dis¬ 
course do not mean anything in another, T(207) C 34 because they can 
be understood only WITHIN the thought-systems of which they are 
a part. 
This is why psychologists are concentrating increasingly on 
the ego, in an attempt to unify their clearly unrelated data. 
It need 
hardly be said that an attempt to relate the unrelated cannot suc¬ 
ceed. 


T 4 c 27. 
The recent ecological emphasis is but a more ingenious way 
of trying to impose order on chaos. 
We have already credited the 
ego with considerable ingenuity, though not with creativeness. 
But 
it should always be remembered that inventiveness is really wasted 
effort, even in its most ingenious forms. 
We do not have to EX¬ 
PLAIN anything. 
This is why we need not trouble ourselves with 
inventiveness. 
The highly specific nature of invention is not worthy 
of the abstract creativity of God's Creations. 
T(208) c 35 223 

T 4 D. 
Love without Conflict (Notes 456 6:20) 

T 4 D l. 
When H. 
reads this to you. 
Bill, try to listen very carefully. 

You have never understood what "The Kingdom of Heaven is 
within you" means. 
224 The reason you cannot understand it is be¬ 
cause it is NOT understandable to the ego, which interprets it as if 
something outside is inside, which does not mean anything. 
The 
word "within" does not belong. 
The Kingdom of Heaven IS you. 


T 4 D 2. 
What else BUT you did the Creator create, and what else but 
you IS His Kingdom? This is the whole message of the Atonement, a 


223 Dec. 
27, 1965 

224 Luke 17:21 Nor will they say, “See here!' or “See there!' For indeed, the kingdom of God is within 
you.” 


185 


1-175 



Volume I Text 


message which in its totality transcends the sum of its parts which 
we have covered before. 
225 Christmas is not a time; it is a state of 
mind. 
The Christ Mind wills from the Soul, not from the Ego, and 
the Christ Mind IS yours. 


T 4 D 3. 
You, too, have a Kingdom which your Soul has created. 
It has 
not ceased to create because your ego has set you on the road of per¬ 
ception. 
Your Soul's creations are no more fatherless than you are. 

Your ego and your Soul will never be co-creators, but your Soul and 
YOUR Creator will ALWAYS be. 
Be confident that your creations 
are as safe as you are. 
The Kingdom is perfectly united and perfectly 
protected, and the ego will not prevail against it. 
226 Amen. 


T 4 D 4. 
That was written in that form because it is a good thing to use 
as a kind of prayer in moments of temptation. 
It is a declaration of 
independence. 
You will both find it very helpful if you understand 
it fully. 


T 4 D 5. 
In its characteristic upside down way, the ego has taken the 
impulses from the superconscious and perceives them as if they 
arise in the unconscious. 
The ego judges what is to be accepted, and 
the impulses from the superconscious are unacceptable to it, be¬ 
cause they clearly point to the unexistence of the ego itself. 
T(209) c 36 
The ego therefore experiences threat, and not only censors but also 
re-interprets the data. 
However, as Freud very correctly pointed out 
what you do not perceive you still know, and it can retain a very 
active life BEYOND your awareness. 


T 4 D 6. 
Repression thus operates to conceal not only the baser im¬ 
pulses, but also the most lofty ones from the ego's awareness, be¬ 
cause BOTH are threatening to the ego and, being concerned pri¬ 
marily with its preservation in the face of threat, it perceives them as 
the same. 
The threat value of the lofty is really much greater to the 
ego, because the pull of God Himself can hardly be equated with the 
pull of human appetites. 



225 T 1 B 22k.; T 2 E 52.; 

226 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 


1-176 


186 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


T 4 D 7. 
By perceiving them as the same, the ego attempts to save it¬ 
self from being swept away, as it would surely be in the presence of 
knowledge. 
The upper level of the unconscious thus contains the 
call of God as well as the call of the body. 
That is why the basic con¬ 
flict between love and fear is unconscious. 
The ego cannot tolerate 
either and represses both by resorting to inhibition. 
Society depends 
on inhibiting the former, but SALVATION depends on disinhibiting 
the latter. 
227 

T 4 D 8. 
The reason you need my help is because you have repressed 
your own guide, and therefore need guidance. 
My role is to separate 
the true from the false in your own unconscious, so it can break 
through the barriers the ego has set up and shine into your minds. 

Against our united strength, the ego CANNOT prevail. 


T 4 D 9. 
It should be quite apparent to you by now why the ego re¬ 
gards the Soul as its "enemy." The ego arose from the Separation, 
and its T(210) C 37 continued existence depends on your continuing 
belief in the Separation. 
Reducing the Soul impulses to the uncon¬ 
scious, the ego has to offer you some sort of reward for maintaining 
this belief. 
All it CAN offer is a sense of temporary existence, which 
begins with its own beginning and ends with its own ending. 
It tells 
you that this life is YOUR existence because it IS its own. 


T 4 D 10 . 
Against this sense of temporary existence, the Soul offers the 
knowledge of permanence and unshakeable BEING. 
No one who 
has experienced the revelation of this can ever fully believe in the 
ego again. 
How can its meager offering to you prevail against the 
glorious gift of God? 

T 4 D ll. 
You who identify with your egos cannot believe that God 
loves you. 
YOU do not love what you have made, and what you 
have made does not love you. 
Being made out of the denial of the 
Father, the ego has no allegiance to its own Maker. 
You cannot con¬ 
ceive of the real relationship that exists between God and His Souls, 

227 “Former” and “latter” here refer to T 4 D 6. 
“the baser impulses” and “the most lofty.” Society 
depends on inhibiting baser, salvation depends on disinhibiting the most lofty. 
Later versions swap 
“former” and “latter” in a most curious copying mistake. 



187 


1-177 



Volume I Text 


because of the hatred you have for the Self you have made. 
You pro¬ 
ject onto your own idea of yourself the will to separate, which con¬ 
flicts with the love you also feel for what you have made because 
you made it. 


T 4 D 12. 
No human love is without this ambivalence, and since no 
ego has experienced love WITHOUT ambivalence, the concept is 
beyond its understanding. 
Love will enter immediately into any 
mind which truly wants it, but it MUST want it truly. 
This means 
that it wants it WITHOUT ambivalence, and this kind of wanting is 
wholly without the ego's "drive to get." T(2ll) c 38 
T 4 D 13. 
There is a kind of experience that is so different from any¬ 
thing the ego can offer that you will never recover. 
The word is used 
quite literally here, - you will never be able to hide again. 
It is neces¬ 
sary to repeat that your belief in darkness and in hiding IS why the 
light cannot enter. 


T 4 D 14. 
The Bible has many references to the immeasurable gifts 
which are for you, but for which YOU must ask. 
228 This is not the 
condition as the ego sets conditions. 
It is the glorious condition of 
what you ARE. 
No force except your own will is strong enough or 
worthy enough to guide you. 
In this you are as free as God, and 
must remain so forever. 


T 4 D 15. 
You can never be bound except in honor, and that is always 
voluntary. 
Let us ask the Father in my name to keep you mindful of 
His love for you and yours for Him. 
He has never failed to answer 
this request, because it asks only for what He has already willed. 

Those who call truly are ALWAYS answered. 


T 4 D 16. 
Note: HS became very fearful here, and rather vaguely 
thought the answer was: "Thou shalt have no other Gods before me, 
because there ARE none. 
229 You still think there are." 


228 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 

229 Exodus 20:3 “You shall have no other gods before Me.” 


1-178 


188 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


T 4 D 17. 
It has never really entered your minds to give up every idea 
you have ever had that OPPOSES knowledge. 
You retain thousands 
of little scraps of meanness which prevent the Holy One from enter¬ 
ing. 
230 Light cannot penetrate through the walls you make to block 
it, and it is forever UNwilling to destroy what you have made. 
No 
one can see THROUGH a wall, but I can step around it. 
T(212) c 39 
T 4 D 18. 
Watch your minds for the scraps of meanness, or you will be 
unable to ask me to do so. 
I can help you only as our Father Created 
us. 
I will love you and honor you and maintain complete respect for 
what you have made. 
But I will neither love nor honor it unless it is 
true. 
I will never forsake you, any more than God will. 
But I MUST 
wait as long as you will to forsake yourselves. 


T 4 D 19. 
Because I wait in love and not in impatience, you will surely 
ask me truly. 
I will come gladly in response to a single unequivocal 
call. 
Watch carefully, and see what it is you are truly asking for. 
Be 
very honest with yourselves about this, for you we must hide noth¬ 
ing from each other. 


T 4 D 20. 
If you will REALLY try to do this, you have taken the first 
step toward preparing your minds for the Holy One to enter. 
We 
will prepare for this together, and once He has come, you will be 
ready to help me make other minds ready for Him. 
How long will 
you deny Him His Kingdom? T(213) C 40 231 

T 4 D 21. 
In your own unconscious, deeply repressed by the ego, is 
the declaration of your release. 
GOD HAS GIVEN YOU EVERY¬ 
THING. 
This is the one fact which MEANS that the ego does not 
exist, and which therefore makes it profoundly afraid. 
In the ego's 
language, to have and to be are different, but they are identical to 
the Soul. 
It knows that you both HAVE everything and ARE every¬ 
thing. 
Any distinction in this respect is meaningful only when the 
idea of getting, which implies a lack, has already BEEN accepted. 



230 Mark 1:24 Saying, “Let us alone! What have we to do with You, Jesus of Nazareth? Did You come 
to destroy us? I know who You are—the Holy One of God!” 

231 Jan. 
7, ’66 


189 


1-179 



Volume I Text 


That is why we made no distinction before between HAVING the 
Kingdom of God and BEING the Kingdom of God. 


T 4 D 22. 
The calm being of God's Kingdom, which in your sane mind 
is perfectly conscious, is ruthlessly banished from the part of the 
mind which the ego rules. 
The ego is desperate because it opposes 
literally invincible odds whether you are asleep or awake. 
Consider 
how much vigilance you have been willing to exert to protect your 
ego, and how little you have been willing to exert to protect your 
higher mind. 
Who but the insane would undertake to believe what 
is not true, and then protect this belief at the cost of Truth? 

T 4 E. 
The Escape from Fear (Notes 467 6:31) 

T 4 E l. 
If you cannot hear the voice of God, it is because you do not 
choose to listen. 
The fact that you DO listen to the voice of your ego 
is demonstrated by your attitudes, your feelings, and your behavior. 

Your attitudes are obviously conflicted; your feelings have a narrow 
range on the negative side, but are never purely joyous; and your 
behavior is either strained or unpredictable. 
T(214) C 41 Yet this IS 
what you want. 
This is what you are fighting to keep, and what you 
are vigilant to save. 
Your minds are filled with schemes to save the 
face of your egos, and you do not seek the Face of God. 


T 4 E 2. 
The glass in which the ego seeks to see its face is dark in¬ 
deed. 
232 How can it maintain the trick of its existence except with 
mirrors? But where you look to find yourself is up to you. 
We have 
said that you cannot change your mind by changing your behavior, 
but we have also said, and many times before, that you CAN change 
your mind. 


T 4 E 3. 
When your mood tells you that you have willed wrongly, 
and this is so whenever you are not joyous, then KNOW this need 
not be. 


T 4 E 4. 
In every case you have thought wrongly about some Soul 
that God created, and are perceiving images your ego makes in a 

1 Corinthians 13:12 For now we see in a mirror, dimly, but then face to face. 
Now I know in part, 
but then I shall know just as I also am known. 



1-180 


190 





Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


darkened glass. 
Think honestly what you have thought that God 
would NOT have thought, and what you have NOT thought that 
God would have you think. 
Search sincerely for what you have 
done and left undone accordingly. 
And then change your minds to 
THINK WITH GOD's. 


T 4 E 5. 
This may seem hard to you, but it is MUCH easier than trying 
to think AGAINST it. 
Your mind IS one with God's. 
Denying this 
and thinking otherwise has held your ego together, but has literally 
split your mind. 
As a loving brother, I am deeply concerned with 
your minds, and urge you to follow my example as you look at 
yourselves and at each other and see in both the glorious Creations 
of a glorious Father. 


T 4 E 6. 
When you are sad, KNOW that this NEED NOT BE. 
Depres¬ 
sion ALWAYS arises ultimately from a sense of being deprived of 
something you want and do not have. 
T(215) C 42 KNOW you are de¬ 
prived of nothing, except by your own decisions, and then decide 
otherwise. 


T 4 E 7. 
When you are anxious, KNOW that all anxiety comes from 
the capriciousness of the ego, and NEED NOT BE. 
You can be as 
vigilant AGAINST the ego's dictates as FOR them. 


T 4 E 8. 
When you feel guilty, KNOW that your ego has indeed vio¬ 
lated the laws of God, but YOU have not. 
Leave the sins of the ego 
to me. 
That is what the Atonement is for. 
But until you change your 
mind about those your ego has hurt, the Atonement cannot release 
you. 
As long as you feel guilty, your ego is in command, because 
only the ego CAN experience guilt. 
THIS NEED NOT BE. 


T 4 E 9. 
You, Helen, have been more honest that B. 
in really trying to 
see whom your ego has hurt, and also in trying to change your mind 
about them. 
(HS doubtful whether this is accurate - written at a time 
when she was very angry.) I am not unmindful of your efforts, but 
you still have much too much energy invested in your ego. 
THIS 
NEED NOT BE. 
Watch your minds for the temptations of the ego, 
and do not be deceived by it. 
KNOW it offers you nothing. 



191 


1-181 



Volume I Text 


T 4 E 10. 
You, B, have not made consistent efforts to change your 
mind except through applying old habit patterns to new ideas. 
But 
you have learned, and learned it better than H., (HS doubtful about 
accuracy here) that your mind gains control over ITSELF when you 
direct it genuinely toward perceiving someone ELSE truly. 
Your 
lack of vitality is due to your former marked effort at solving your 
needless depression and anxiety through disinterest. 
Because your 
ego WAS protected by this unfortunate negative attribute, you are 
afraid to abandon it. 
T(216) C 43 

T 4 E 11. 
When you have given up this voluntary dis-spiriting, you 
have already seen how your mind can focus, and rise above fatigue, 
and heal. 
But you are not sufficiently vigilant against the demands 
of your ego that you disengage yourself. 
THIS NEED NOT BE. 
The 
habit of engaging WITH God and His Creations is easily made if 
you refuse actively to let your minds slip away. 
Your problem is not 
concentration: it is a belief that nobody, including yourself, is 
WORTH consistent effort. 


T 4 E 12. 
Side with me CONSISTENTLY against this deception, as we 
have sided against it briefly already. 
Do not permit this shabby be¬ 
lief to pull you back. 
The disheartened are useless to themselves and 
to me, but only the ego can be disheartened. 


T 4 E 13. 
Have you REALLY considered how many opportunities you 
have to gladden yourselves, and how many of them you have re¬ 
fused? There is no limit to the power of a Son of God, but he himself 
can limit the expression of his power as much as he wills. 
Your 
mind and mine can unite in shining your ego away, and releasing 
the strength of God into everything you think and will and do. 
Do 
no settle for ANYTHING less than this, and refuse to accept any¬ 
thing BUT this as your goal. 


T 4 E 14. 
Watch your minds carefully for any beliefs that hinder its 
accomplishment, and step away from them. 
Judge how well you 
have done this by your own feelings, for this is the one RIGHT use 
of judgment. 
Judgment, like any other defense, can be used to attack 
or protect, to hurt or to heal. 
The ego SHOULD be brought to your 


1-182 


192 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


own judgment and found wanting there. 
Without your own alle¬ 
giance, protection, and love it cannot exist. 
T(217) C 44 
T 4 E 15. 
Judge your ego truly, and you MUST withdraw allegiance, 
protection, and love from it. 
You are mirrors of truth in which God 
Himself shines in perfect light. 
To the ego's dark glass you need but 
say, "I will not look there because I KNOW these images are not 
true." 

T 4 E 16. 
Then let me the Holy One shine upon you in peace, 233 know¬ 
ing that this and only this MUST be! His Mind shone on you in your 
creation, and brought YOUR mind into being. 
His Mind still shines 
on you and MUST shine THROUGH you. 
Your ego cannot prevent 
HIM from shining on you, but it CAN prevent you from letting Him 
shine THROUGH you. 


T 4 E 17. 
The first coming of Christ is just another name for the Crea¬ 
tion, for Christ is the Son of God. 
The SECOND coming of Christ 
means nothing more than the end of the ego's rule over part of the 
minds of men, and the healing of the mind. 
234 1 was created like you 
in the First, and I am reminding you that I have called you to join 
with me in the Second. 


T 4 E 18. 
If you will think over your lives, you will see how carefully 
the preparations were made. 
I am in charge of the Second Coming 
as I have already told you, and my judgment, which is used only for 
its protection, cannot be wrong because it NEVER attacks. 
235 YOURS 
is so distorted that you believe that I was mistaken in choosing you. 


I assure you this is a mistake of your own egos. 
Do NOT mistake it 
for humility. 


T 4 E 19. 
Your egos are trying to convince you that THEY are real, 
and I am not, because if I AM real, I am no more real than YOU are. 



233 Numbers 6:25-26 The LORD make His face shine upon you. 
And be gracious to you: The LORD 
lift up His countenance upon you, And give you peace.”' 

234 Matthew 16:27 “For the Son of Man will come in the glory of His Father with His angels, and then 
He will reward each according to his works.” 

23 Matthew 16:27 “For the Son of Man will come in the glory of His Father with His angels, and then 
He will reward each according to his works.” 


193 


1-183 




Volume I Text 


That knowledge, and I assure you that it IS knowledge, means that 
Christ must come into your minds and heal them. 
T(218) C 45 
T 4 E 20. 
While I am not attacking your egos, I AM working with your 
higher mind whether you are asleep or awake, (just as your ego 
does with your lower mind.) I am your vigilance in this, because 
you are too confused to recognize your own hope. 


T 4 E 21.1 was not mistaken. 
Your minds WILL elect to join with 
mine, and together we are invincible. 
You two will yet come to¬ 
gether in my name and your sanity will be restored. 
236 1 raised the 
dead by KNOWING that life is an eternal attribute of everything 
that the living God Created. 
237 Why do you believe that it is harder 
for me to inspire the dis-spirited or to stabilize the unstable? I do not 
believe that there is an order of difficulty in miracles: YOU do. 
I 
have called and you will answer. 
I KNOW that miracles are natural, 
because they are expressions of love. 
My calling you is as natural as 
your answer and as inevitable. 
T(219) C 46 238 

T 4 F. 
The Ego-Body Illusion (Notes 477 6:41) 

T 4 F l. 
ALL things work together for good. 
239 There are NO excep¬ 
tions except in the ego's judgment. 
Control is a central factor in 
what the ego permits into consciousness, and one to which it de¬ 
votes its maximum vigilance. 
This is NOT the way a balanced mind 
holds together. 
ITS control is unconscious. 


T 4 F 2. 
The ego is further off balance by keeping its primary motiva¬ 
tion UNconscious, and raising control rather than sensible judgment 
to predominance. 
It has every reason to do this, according to the 
thought-system which both gave rise to it and which it serves. 
Sane 


236 Matthew 18:20 “For where two or three are gathered together in My name, I am there in the midst of 
them.” 

237 John 11:43-44 Now when He had said these things, He cried with a loud voice, “Lazarus, come 
forth!” And he who had died came out bound hand and foot with graveclothes, and his face was 
wrapped with a cloth. 
Jesus said to them, “Loose him, and let him go.” 

238 1/12/66 

239 Romans 8:28 And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those 
who are the called according to His purpose. 



1-184 


194 




Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


judgment would inevitably judge AGAINST it, and MUST be oblit¬ 
erated by the ego in the interest of its self-preservation. 


T 4 F 3. 
A crucial source of the ego's off-balance state is its lack of dis¬ 
crimination between impulses from God and from the body. 
Any 
thought-system which makes THIS confusion MUST be insane. 
Yet 
this demented state is ESSENTIAL to the ego, which judges ONLY 
in terms of threat or nonthreat TO ITSELF. 


T 4 F 4. 
In one sense, the ego's fear of the idea of God is at least logi¬ 
cal, because this idea DOES dispel it. 
Fear of dissolution from the 
higher source, then, makes SOME sense in ego terms. 
But fear of the 
body, with which the ego identifies so closely, is more blatantly 
senseless. 
The body is the ego's home by its own election. 
It is the 
only identification with which it feels safe, because the body's vul¬ 
nerability is its own best argument that you CANNOT be of God. 

T(220) C 47 

T 4 F 5. 
This is the belief that it sponsors eagerly. 
Yet the ego hates the 
body, because it does not accept the idea that the body is good 
enough as its home. 
Here is where the mind becomes actually 
dazed. 
Being told by the ego that it is really part of the body, and 
that the body is its protector, it is also constantly informed that the 
body can NOT protect it. 
This, of course, is not only true, but per¬ 
fectly obvious. 


T 4 F 6. 
Therefore, the mind asks, "Where can I go for protection?", to 
which the ego replies, "Turn to me." The mind, and not without 
cause, reminds the ego that it has itself insisted that it IS identified 
with the body, so there is no point in turning to it for protection. 
The 
ego has no real answer to this because there ISN'T any. 
But it DOES 
have a typical solution. 
It obliterates the question from the mind's 
awareness. 
Once unconscious, it can and does produce uneasiness, 
but it cannot be answered because it cannot be asked. 


T 4 F 7. 
This is the question which MUST be asked: "Where am I to go 
for protection?" Only an insane mind FAILS to ask it. 
Even the in¬ 
sane ask it unconsciously, but it requires real sanity to ask it con¬ 
sciously. 



195 


1-185 



Volume I Text 


T 4 F 8. 
If you will remember your dream about the recorder, which 
was remarkably accurate in some ways because it came partly from 
ego-repressed knowledge, the real problem was correctly stated as 
"What is the question?" T(22l) c 48 because, as you very well knew, 
the answer COULD be found if the question were recognized. 
If you 
remember, there were a number of solutions you attempted, all ego- 
based, not because you thought they would really work, but be¬ 
cause the question ITSELF was obscure. 


T 4 F 9. 
When the Bible says "Seek and ye shall find," 240 it does NOT 
mean that you should seek blindly and desperately for something 
you wouldn't recognize. 
Meaningful seeking is consciously under¬ 
taken, consciously organized, and consciously directed. 
B's chief 
contribution to your joint venture is his insistence that the goal be 
formulated clearly, and KEPT IN MIND. 


T 4 F 10. 
You, Helen, are not good at doing this. 
You still search for 
many gods 241 simultaneously, and this goal confusion, given a 
strong will, MUST produce chaotic behavior. 
B's behavior is not 
chaotic, because he is not so much goal-divided as not goal- 
ORIENTED. 
Where Helen has overinvested in many goals, B has 
underinvested in ALL goals. 
He has the advantage of POTEN¬ 
TIALLY greater freedom from distractibility, but he does not care 
enough to use it. 
Helen has the advantage of great effort, but she 
keeps losing sight of the goal. 


T 4 F ll. 
B has very intelligently suggested that you both should set 
yourself the goal of really studying for this course. 
There can be no 
doubt of the wisdom of this decision, for any student who wants to 
pass it. 
But, knowing your individual weaknesses as learners and 
being T(222) c 49 a teacher with some experience, I must remind you 
that learning and wanting to learn are inseparable. 


' |,j Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 

241 While the Urtext manuscript does have “gods” here, the Notes is rather ambiguous, and very 
possibly this should be “goals.” 


1-186 


196 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


T 4 F12. 
All learners learn best when they believe that what they are 
trying to learn is of value to them. 
But values in this world are hier¬ 
archical, and not everything you may WANT to learn has lasting 
value. 
T(223) C 50 Indeed, many of the things you want to learn are 
chosen BECAUSE their value will not last. 
The ego thinks it is an 
advantage not to commit itself to ANYTHING that is eternal, be¬ 
cause the eternal MUST come from God. 


T 4 F13. 
Etemalness is the one function that the ego has tried to de¬ 
velop, but has systematically failed. 
It may surprise you to learn that 
had the ego willed to do so, it COULD have made the eternal, be¬ 
cause, as a product of the mind, it IS endowed with the power of its 
own creator. 
But the DECISION to do this, rather than the ABILITY 
to do it is what the ego cannot tolerate. 
That is because the decision, 
from which the ability would naturally develop, would necessarily 
involve true perception, a state of clarity which the ego, fearful of 
being judged truly, MUST avoid. 


T 4 F 14. 
The results of this dilemma are peculiar, but no more so than 
the dilemma itself. 
The ego has reacted characteristically here as 
elsewhere, because mental illness, which is ALWAYS a form of ego- 
involvement, is not a problem of reliability as much as of validity. 

The ego compromises with the issue of the eternal, just as it does 
with all issues that touch on the real question in ANY way. 
By com¬ 
promising in connection with all TANGENTIAL questions, it hopes 
to hide the REAL question and keep it OUT OF MIND. 
Its character¬ 
istic "business" with non-essentials is precisely for that purpose. 


T 4 F15. 
Consider the alchemist's age-old attempts to turn base metal 
into gold. 
(This typo was originally "god"). 
The one question which 
the alchemist did not permit himself to ask was "What For?" He 
COULD not ask this, because it would immediately become appar¬ 
ent that there was no sense in his efforts, even if he succeeded. 
The 
ego has also countenanced some strange compromises with the idea 
of the eternal, making odd attempts to relate the concept to the un¬ 
important in an effort to satisfy the mind without jeopardizing itself. 



197 


1-187 




Volume I Text 


Thus, it has permitted many good minds to devote themselves to 
perpetual MOTION, but NOT to perpetual THOUGHTS. 


T 4 F16. 
Ideational preoccupations with conceptual problems set up 
to be incapable of solution are another favorite ego device for im¬ 
peding the strong-willed from real progress in learning. 
The prob¬ 
lems of squaring the circle, and carrying pi to infinity are good ex¬ 
amples. 
A more recent ego-attempt is particularly noteworthy. 
The 
idea of preserving the body by suspension, thus giving it the kind of 
limited immortality T(224) C 51 which the ego can tolerate, is among 
its more recent appeals to the mind. 


T 4 F17. 
It is noticeable that in all these diversionary tactics, the ONE 
question which is NEVER asked by those who pursue them is 
"What for?" This is the question which YOU must learn to ask in 
connection with everything your mind wills to undertake. 
What is 
your purpose? Whatever it is, you cannot doubt that it will channel¬ 
ize your efforts automatically. 
When you make a decision of pur¬ 
pose, then, you HAVE made a decision about future effort, a deci¬ 
sion which will remain in effect UNLESS you change the DECI¬ 
SION. 


T 4 F18. 
Psychologists are in a good position to realize that the ego is 
capable of making and accepting as real some very distorted asso¬ 
ciations which are not true. 
The confusion of sex with aggression, 
and resulting behavior which is the same for BOTH, is a good ex¬ 
ample. 
This is understandable to the psychologist, and does not 
produce surprise. 
The lack of surprise, however, is NOT a sign of 
understanding. 
It is a symptom of the psychologist's ability to ac¬ 
cept as reasonable a compromise which is clearly senseless, to at¬ 
tribute it to the mental illness of the patient rather than his own, and 
to limit his questions about both the patient AND himself to the triv¬ 
ial. 


T 4 F 19. 
These relatively minor confusions of the ego are not among 
its more profound misassociations, although they DO reflect them. 


Your own egos have been blocking the more important questions 
which your minds should ask. 
You do NOT understand a patient 


1-188 


198 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


while you yourselves are willing to limit the questions you raise 
about HIS mind, because you are also accepting these limits for 
YOURS. 
This makes you unable to heal him AND yourselves. 
Be 
ALWAYS unwilling to adapt to ANY situation in which miracle- 
mindedness is unthinkable. 
That state in ITSELF is enough to dem¬ 
onstrate that perception is wrong. 


T 4 G. 
The Constant State (Notes 487 6:51) 

T 4 G l. 
It cannot be emphasized too often that CORRECTING per¬ 
ception is merely a temporary expedient. 
It is necessary ONLY be¬ 
cause Misperception is a BLOCK to knowledge, while ACCURATE 
perception is a stepping-stone TOWARD it. 
The whole value of 
right perception lies in the inevitable judgment which it necessarily 
entails that it is UNNECESSARY. 
This removes the block entirely. 


T 4 G 2. 
You may ask how this is possible as long as you appear to be 
living in this world. 
And since this is a sensible question, it has a 
sensible answer. 
But you T(225) C 52 must be careful that you really 
understand the question. 
What IS the you who are living in this 
world? Bill will probably have more trouble with this than you, but 
if he will try not to close his mind, he may decide that we are NOT 
engaging in denial after all. 


T 4 G 3. 
To help him, it might be wise to review a number of the con¬ 
cepts with which he does not appear to have trouble, except at 
times. 
He liked the idea of invisibility, and was particularly open to 
the concept of different orders of reality. 
He also found the notion of 
varying densities of energy appealing. 
While he may yet agree that 
these are merely teaching aids, this is a good time to employ them. 


T 4 G 4. 
Immortality is a constant state. 
It is as true now as it ever was 
or will be, because it implies NO CHANGE AT ALL. 
It is not a con¬ 
tinuum, and it is NOT understood by comparing it with any oppo¬ 
site. 
Knowledge NEVER involves comparisons. 
That is its essential 
difference from everything else the mind can grasp. 


T 4 G 5. 
"A little knowledge" is not dangerous except to the ego. 

Vaguely the ego senses threat, and, being unable to realize that "a 


199 


1-189 


Volume I Text 


little knowledge" is a meaningless phrase because "all" and "a lit¬ 
tle" in this context are the same, decides that since "all" is impossi¬ 
ble, the fear does not lie in this. 
"A little," however, is a scarcity con¬ 
cept, and this the ego understands well. 
Regarding "all" as impossi¬ 
ble, "a little" is perceived as the real threat. 


T 4 G 6. 
The essential thing to remember always is that the ego DOES 
NOT RECOGNIZE the real source of its perceived threat. 
And if 
YOU associate yourself WITH the ego, YOU do not perceive the 
whole situation as it really is. 
Only your allegiance to it gives the 
ego ANY power over you. 
We have spoken of the ego as if it were a 
separate thing, acting on its own. 
This was necessary to persuade 
you that you cannot dismiss it lightly, and MUST realize how much 
of your thinking is ego-directed. 
But we cannot safely leave it at 
that, or you will regard yourselves as necessarily conflicted as long 
as you are here, or more properly, BELIEVE that you are here. 


T 4 G 7. 
The ego is nothing more than a PART of your belief about 
yourselves. 
Your other life has continued without interruption, and 
has been and always will be totally unaffected by your attempts to 
dissociate. 
The ratio of repression and T(226) C 53 dissociation of truth 
varies with the individual ego-illusion (tell Bill that phrase is VERY 
good), but dissociation is always involved, or you would not believe 
that you ARE here. 


T 4 G 8. 
When I told Bill to concentrate on the phrase "here I am. 

Lord," I did not mean "in this world" by "here." I wanted him to 
think of himself as a separate consciousness, capable of direct com¬ 
munication with the Creator of that consciousness. 
He, too, MUST 
begin to think of himself as a very powerful receiving and sending 
channel, a description I once gave you symbolically. 
Remember that 
HE understood it before you did, because you are more dissociative 
and less repressed. 


T 4 G 9. 
Your great debt to each other is something you should never 
forget. 
It is exactly the same debt that you owe to me. 
Whenever you 
react egotistically toward each other, you are throwing away the 
graciousness of your indebtedness and the holy perception it would 


1-190 


200 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


produce. 
The reason why the term "holy" can be used here is that, 
as you learn how much you ARE indebted to the whole Sonship 
which includes me, you come as close to knowledge as perception 
ever can. 
This gap is so small knowledge can easily flow across it 
and obliterate it forever. 


T 4 G 10. 
You have very little trust in me as yet, but it will increase as 
you turn more and more often to me instead of to your egos for 
guidance. 
The results will convince you increasingly that your 
choice in turning to me is the only sane one you can make. 
No one 
who has learned from experience that one choice brings peace and 
joy while another brings chaos and disaster needs much condition¬ 
ing. 
The ego cannot withstand the conditioning process, because the 
process itself DEMONSTRATES that there is another way. 


T 4 G ll. 
The classic conditioning by rewards model has always been 
most effective. 
Howard Hunt made a very good point in this con¬ 
nection, even though he did not understand that the real reason 
why conditioning through pain is not the most efficient method is 
because pain itself is an ego-illusion, and can never induce more 
than a temporary effect. 


T 4 G 12. 
The rewards of God are immediately recognized as eternal. 

Since this recognition is made by YOU and NOT by your ego, the 
recognition ITSELF establishes that you and your ego CANNOT be 
identical. 
You may believe that you have already accepted the dif¬ 
ference, but you are by no means convinced as yet. 
The very fact 
that you are preoccupied with the idea of escaping FROM the ego 
shows this. 
T(227) C 54 

T 4 G 13. 
You cannot escape from the ego by humbling it, or control¬ 
ling it, or punishing it. 
The ego and the Soul DO NOT KNOW each 
other. 
The separated mind cannot maintain the separation EXCEPT 
by dissociating. 
Having done this, it utilizes repression against all 
truly natural impulses, not because the EGO is a separate thing, but 
because you want to believe that YOU are. 
The ego is a device for 
maintaining this belief, but it is still only YOUR willingness to use 
the device that enables it to endure. 



201 


1-191 


Volume I Text 


T 4 G 14. 
My trust in you is greater than yours in me at the moment, 
but it will not always be that way. 
Your mission is very simple. 
You 
have been chosen to live so as to demonstrate that You are NOT an 
ego. 
I repeat that I do not choose God's channels wrongly. 
The Holy 
One 242 shares my trust and always approves my Atonement deci¬ 
sions, because my will is never out of accord with His. 


T 4 G 15. 
1 have told you several times that I am in charge of the 
whole Atonement. 
This is ONLY because I completed my part in it 
as a man, and can now complete it through other men. 
My chosen 
receiving and sending channels cannot fail, because I will lend them 
MY strength as long as theirs is wanting. 
I will go with you to the 
Holy One, and through MY perception HE can bridge the little gap. 

Your gratitude to each OTHER is the only gift I want. 
I will bring it 
to God for you, knowing that to know your brother IS to know God. 

T 4 G 16. 
A little knowledge is an all-encompassing thing. 
If you are 
grateful to each other you are grateful to God for what He created. 

Through your gratitude you can come to know each other, and one 
moment of real recognition makes all men your brothers because 
they are all of your Father. 
Love does not conquer all things, but it 
DOES set all things right. 


T 4 G 17. 
Because you are all the Kingdom of God, I can lead you back 
to your own creations, which you do not yet know. 
God has kept 
them very safe in HIS knowing while your attention has wandered. 

Bill gave you a very important idea when he told you that what has 
been dissociated IS STILL THERE. 
I am grateful to him for that, and 
I hope he will not decide that it is true only for you. 
Even though 
dissociation is much more apparent in you, and repression is much 
more evident in him, each of you utilizes both. 


T 4 G 18. 
Wisdom always dictates that a therapist work through 
WEAKER defenses first. 
That is why I suggested to Bill that he per¬ 
suade you to deal with REPRESSION first. 
T(228) c 55 We have only 


41 Mark 1:24 Saying, “Let us alone! What have we to do with You, Jesus of Nazareth? Did You come 
to destroy us? I know who You are—the Holy One of God!” 


1-192 


202 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


just about reached the point where dissociation means much to you, 
because it is so important to your misbeliefs. 
Bill might do well, - 
and you could help him here, - to concentrate more on HIS dissocia¬ 
tive tendencies and not try to deal with repression yet. 


T 4 G 19.1 hinted at this when I remarked on his habit of disengaging 
himself, and when I spoke to him about distantiation. 
These are all 
forms of dissociation, and these weaker forms were always more 
evident in him than in you. 
That is because dissociation was so ex¬ 
treme in your case that you did not have to hide it because you were 
not aware that it was there. 
Bill, on the other hand, DOES dissociate 
more than he thinks, and that is why he cannot listen. 
He does not 
need to go through the same course in repression that you did, be¬ 
cause he will give up his major misdefense AFTER he has rid him¬ 
self of the lesser ones. 


T 4 G 20. 
Do not disturb yourself about repression. 
Bill, but DO train 
yourself to be alert to any tendency to withdraw from your brothers. 

Withdrawal is frightening, and you do not recognize all the forms it 
takes in you. 
Helen is right that she will experience things that will 
cut across all her perceptions because of their stunning knowledge. 


You were right that this will occur when she learns to recognize 
what she ALREADY knows and has dissociated. 


T 4 G 21. 
You, Bill, will learn somewhat differently, because you are 
afraid of all complete involvements, and believe that they lessen 
YOU. 
You have learned to be so much more clear-sighted about this 
that you should be ready to oppose it in yourself RELATIVELY eas¬ 
ily. 
As you come closer to a brother, you DO approach me, and as 
you withdraw from him I become distant to you. 


T 4 G 22. 
Your giant step forward was to INSIST on a collaborative 
venture. 
This does NOT go against the true spirit of meditation at 
all. 
It is inherent IN it. 
Meditation is a collaborative venture with 
GOD. 
It CANNOT be undertaken successfully by those who disen¬ 
gage themselves from the Sonship, because they are disengaging 
themselves from me. 
God will come to you only as you will give 
Him to your brothers. 
Learn first of them, and you will be ready to 


203 


1-193 


Volume I Text 


hear God as you hear them. 
That is because the function of love is 
One. 


T 4 G 23. 
How can you teach someone the value of something he has 
thrown away deliberately? He must have thrown it away because he 
did NOT value it. 
You can only show him how T(229) C 56 miserable 
he is WITHOUT it, and bring it near very slowly, so he can learn 
how his misery lessens as he approaches it. 
This conditions him to 
associate his misery with its ABSENCE, and to associate the OPPO¬ 
SITE of misery with its presence. 
It gradually becomes desirable, as 
he changes his mind about its worth. 


T 4 G 24.1 am conditioning you to associate misery with the ego, and 
joy with your Soul. 
You have conditioned yourself the other way 
around. 
But a far greater reward will break through any condition¬ 
ing, if it is repeatedly offered when the old habit is broken. 
You are 
still free to choose. 
But can you really WANT the rewards of the ego 
in the presence of the rewards of God? 

T 4 H. 
Creation and Communication (Notes 508 6:72) 

T 4 H 1. 
It should be clear that, while the content of any particular 
ego-illusion does not matter, it is usually more helpful to correct it 
in a specific context. 
Bill is right that you are too abstract in this mat¬ 
ter. 
Ego-illusions are QUITE specific, although they frequently 
change, and although the mind is naturally abstract, it became con¬ 
crete voluntarily as soon as it splits. 
However, only PART of it splits, 
so only PART of it is concrete. 


T 4 H 2. 
The concrete part is the same part that believes in the ego, 
because the ego DEPENDS on the specific. 
It is the part that believes 
your existence means you are SEPARATE. 
Everything the ego per¬ 
ceives is a separate whole, without the relationships that imply BE¬ 
ING. 
The ego is thus AGAINST communication, except in so far as it 
is utilized to ESTABLISH separateness, rather than to abolish it. 


T 4 H 3. 
The communication system of the ego is based on its own 
thought-system, as is everything else it dictates. 
Its communication 
is controlled by its need to protect itself, and it will disrupt commu- 


1-194 


204 


Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


nication when it experiences threat. 
While this is always so, individ¬ 
ual egos perceive different kinds of threat, which are quite specific 
in their own judgment. 
For example, although all forms of perceived 
demands may be classified (or judged) by the ego as coercive com¬ 
munication which must be disrupted, the response of breaking 
communication will nevertheless be to a SPECIFIC PERSON or per¬ 
sons. 


T 4 H 4. 
The specificity of the ego's thinking, then, results in a spuri¬ 
ous kind of generalization, which is really not abstract at all. 
It will 
respond in certain specific ways to all stimuli which it perceives as 
related. 
In contrast, the Soul reacts in the same way to everything it 
know is true, and does not respond at all to anything else. 
Nor does 
it make any attempt to ESTABLISFI what is true. 
It knows T(230) c 57 
that what is true is everything that God created. 
It is in complete 
and direct communication with every aspect of Creation, because it 
is in complete and direct communication with its Creator. 


T 4 H 5. 
TFilS communication IS the will of God. 
Creation and com¬ 
munication are synonymous. 
God created every mind by communi¬ 
cating His Mind to it, thus establishing it forever as a channel for the 
reception of His Mind and Will. 
Since only beings of a like order can 
truly communicate. 
Elis Creations naturally communicate WITFi 
Elim and communicate LIKE Elim. 
This communication is perfectly 
abstract, in that its quality is universal in application, and not sub¬ 
ject to ANY judgment, ANY exception, or ANY alteration. 


T 4 H 6. 
God made you BY this and FOR this. 
The mind can distort its 
functions, but it cannot endow itself with those it was not given. 

That is why the mind cannot totally lose the ability to communicate, 
even though it may refuse to utilize it on behalf of being. 
Existence 
as well as being rests on communication. 


T 4 H 7. 
Existence is SPECIFIC in how, what, and with whom com¬ 
munication is worth undertaking. 
Being is completely without these 
distinctions. 
It is a state in which the mind IS in communication 
with everything that is real, including its own Soul. 
To whatever 
extent you permit this state to be curtailed, you are limiting your 


205 


1-195 





Volume I Text 


sense of your OWN reality, which becomes total only by recogniz¬ 
ing ALL reality in the glorious context of its real relationship to 
YOU. 
This IS your reality. 
Do not desecrate it or recoil from it. 
It is 
your real home, your real temple, 243 and your real self. 


T 4 H 8. 
God, who encompasses ALL Being, nevertheless created 
separate beings who have everything individually, but who want to 
share it to increase their joy. 
Nothing that is real can be increased 
EXCEPT by sharing it. 
That is why God Himself created you. 
Divine 
Abstraction takes joy in application, and that is what creation 
MEANS. 
How, what, and to whom are irrelevant, because real crea¬ 
tion gives everything since it can only create like itself. 
Remember 
that in being, there is no difference between having and being, as 
there is in existence. 
In the state of being, the mind gives everything 
always. 


T 4 H 9. 
The Bible repeatedly states that you should praise God. 
244 
This hardly means that you should tell Him how wonderful He is. 

He has no ego with which to accept T(231) C 58 thanks, and no per¬ 
ceptions with which to judge your offerings. 
But unless you take 
your part in the creation. 
His joy is not complete because YOURS is 
incomplete. 
And THIS He does know. 
He knows it in his own Being 
and its experience of His Sons' experience. 
The constant GOING 


243 1 Corinthians 3:16 Do you not know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God 
dwells in you? 

244 Psalm 150:1-6 Praise the LORD! 

Praise God in His sanctuary; 

Praise Him in His mighty firmament! 

Praise Him for His mighty acts; 

Praise Him according to His excellent greatness! 

Praise Him with the sound of the trumpet; 

Praise Him with the lute and harp! 

Praise Him with the timbrel and dance; 

Praise Him with stringed instruments and flutes! 

Praise Him with loud cymbals; 

Praise Him with clashing cymbals! 

Let everything that has breath praise the LORD. 


Praise the LORD! 

Luke 19:37 And as he was now drawing nigh, even at the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole 
multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works 
which they had seen; 

Romans 15:llPraise the LORD, all you Gentiles! 

Laud Him, all you peoples! 


1-196 


206 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


OUT of His love is blocked when His Channels are closed, and He 
IS lonely when the minds He created do not communicate fully with 
Him. 


T 4 H 10 . 
God HAS kept your kingdom for you, but He cannot share 
His joy with you until you know it with your whole mind. 
Even 
revelation is not enough, because it is communication FROM God. 

But it is not enough until it is shared. 
God does not need revelation 
returned to Him, which would clearly be impossible, but He DOES 
want revelation brought to others. 
This cannot be done with the ac¬ 
tual revelation, because its content cannot be expressed, and it is in¬ 
tensely personal to the mind which receives it. 
But it can still be re¬ 
turned BY that mind through its attitudes to other minds which the 
knowledge from the revelation brings. 


T 4 H ll. 
God is praised whenever any mind learns to be wholly help¬ 
ful. 
This is impossible without being wholly harmless, because the 
two beliefs cannot coexist. 
The truly helpful are invulnerable, be¬ 
cause they are NOT protecting their egos, so that nothing CAN hurt 
them. 
Their helpfulness IS their praise of God, and He will return 
their praise of Him, because they are like Him and can rejoice to¬ 
gether. 
God goes out to them and through them, and there is great 
joy throughout the Kingdom. 
Every mind that is changed adds to 
this joy with its own individual willingness to share in it. 


T 4 H 12. 
The truly helpful are God's miracle-workers, whom I direct 
until we are all united in the joy of the kingdom. 
I will direct you to 
wherever you can be truly helpful, and to whoever can follow my 
guidance through you. 
I arranged for Bill to attend the rehabilitation 
meetings for very good reasons, and I want him to know them so 
we can share our goal there. 


T 4 I. 
True Rehabilitation (Notes 514 6:77) 

T 4 11 . 
Properly speaking, every mind which is split needs rehabilita¬ 
tion. 
The medical orientation emphasizes the body, and the voca¬ 
tional orientation stresses the ego. 
The team approach generally 
leads more to confusion than anything else, because it is too often 


207 


1-197 


Volume I Text 


misused as an expedient for sharing the ego's dominion with other 

ego's rather than as a real experiment in cooperation of minds. 
T(232) 
C 59 

T 412. 
The reason why Bill needs this experience is because he needs 
rehabilitating himself. 
How often have I answered "help him" when 
you asked me to help you? He, too, has asked for help, and he has 
been helped whenever he was truly helpful to you. 
He has also 
gained to whatever extent he could give. 
He will help YOU more 
truly by going, if he can remember all the time he is there that his 
ONLY reason for being there is to REPRESENT ME. 


T 413. 
Rehabilitation, as a movement, has been an improvement over 
overt neglect, but it is often little more than a painful attempt on the 
part of the halt to lead the blind. 
Bill, you will see this at every meet¬ 
ing. 
But this is not why you were chosen to go. 
You have a fear of 
broken bodies, because your ego cannot tolerate them. 
Your 245 ego 
cannot tolerate ego-weakness, either, without ambivalence, because 
it is afraid of its own weakness and the weakness of its chosen 
home. 


T 414. 
That is really why you recoil from the demands of the de¬ 
pendent, and from the sight of a broken body. 
Your ego is threat¬ 
ened, and blocks your natural impulse to help, placing you under 
the strain of divided will. 
You withdraw to allow your ego to re¬ 
cover, and to regain enough strength to be helpful again on a basis 
limited enough NOT to threaten your ego, but also too limited to 
give YOU joy. 


T 415. 
Those with broken bodies are often looked down on by the 
ego, because of its belief that nothing but a perfect body is worthy as 
its OWN temple. 
A mind that recoils from a hurt body is in great 
need of rehabilitation itself. 
A damaged brain is also hardly a dan¬ 
ger. 
ALL symptoms of hurt need true helpfulness, and whenever 
they are met with this, the mind that so meets them heals ITSELF. 



245 Ur manuscript has “you” rather than “your” which is a fairly obvious typo. 



1-198 


208 



Chapter 4 - The Root of All Evil 


T 416 . 
Rehabilitation is an attitude of praising God as He Himself 
knows praise. 
He offers praise to you, and you must offer it to oth¬ 
ers. 
The real limitations on clinical psychology, as it is evaluated by 
its followers at present, are not reflected by the attitudes of psychia¬ 
trists, or medical boards, or hospital administrators, even though 
most of them are sadly in need of rehabilitation themselves. 


T 4 I 7. 
The real handicaps of the clinicians lie in their attitudes to 
those whom their egos perceive as weakened and damaged. 
By 
these evaluations, they have T(233) C 60 weakened and damaged their 
own helpfulness, and have thus set their own rehabilitation back. 

Rehabilitation is NOT concerned with the ego's fight for control, nor 
the ego's need to avoid and withdraw. 


T 418. 
Bill, you can do much on behalf of your own rehabilitation 
AND Helen's, and much more universally as well, if you think of 
the Princeton meetings in this way: 

I am here ONLY to be truly helpful. 


I am here to represent Christ, who sent me. 


I do not have to worry about what to say or what to do, 246 
because the one who sent me will direct me. 


I am content to be wherever He wishes, 247 knowing he goes 
there with me. 


I will be healed as I let him teach me to heal. 



246 Matthew 10:19 “But when they deliver you up, do not worry about how or what you should speak. 

For it will be given to you in that hour what you should speak;” 

247 The manuscript has “wished” but the Notes has “wishes” which seems more appropriate here. 



209 


1-199 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 5 -Healing and Wholeness 

T 5 A. 
Introduction (Notes 518 6:82) 

T 5 A 1. 
To heal is to make happy. 
I told you once to think how many 
opportunities you have to gladden yourselves, and how many you 
have refused. 
This is exactly the same as telling you that you have 
refused to heal yourselves. 
The light that belongs in you is the light 
of joy. 
Radiance is not associated with sorrow. 
Depression is often 
contagious, but although it may affect those who come in contact 
with it, they do not yield to its influence wholeheartedly. 
But joy 
calls forth an integrated willingness to share in it, and thus pro¬ 
motes the mind's natural impulse to RESPOND AS ONE. 


T 5 A 2. 
Those who attempt to heal without being wholly joyous 
themselves call forth different kinds of responses at the same time, 
and thus deprive others of the joy of responding wholeheartedly. 
To 
be wholehearted, you MUST be happy. 
If fear and love cannot coex¬ 
ist, and if it is impossible to be wholly fearful and remain alive, then 
the only possible whole state IS that of love. 
There is no difference 
between love and joy. 
Therefore, the only possible whole state IS the 
wholly joyous. 


T 5 A 3. 
To heal, or to make joyous, is therefore the same as to inte¬ 
grate and MAKE ONE. 
That is why it makes no difference TO what 
part or BY what part of the Sonship the healing is done. 
EVERY part 
benefits, and benefits equally. 
YOU are being blessed by every be¬ 
neficent thought of any of your brothers anywhere. 
You should 
want to bless them in return, out of gratitude. 


T 5 A 4. 
You do not have to know them individually, or they you. 
The 
light of joy T(234) C 61 is so strong that it radiates throughout the Son- 
ship and returns thanks to the Father for radiating HIS joy upon it. 

Only God's own holy children are worthy to be channels of his 
beautiful joy, because only they are beautiful enough to hold it by 
sharing it. 
It is impossible for a Child of God to love his neighbor 


1-200 


210 


Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


EXCEPT as himself. 
That is why the healer's prayer is, "let me know 
this brother as I know myself." 

T 5 B. 
Healing as Joining (Notes 520 6:84) 

T 5 B 1. 
Healing is an act of thought by which two minds perceive 
their oneness, and become glad. 
This gladness calls to every part of 
the Sonship to rejoice with them, and let God Himself go out into 
them and through them. 
Only the healed mind can experience reve¬ 
lation with lasting effect, because revelation is an experience of pure 
joy. 
If you do not will to be wholly joyous, your mind cannot HAVE 
what it does not will to BE. 


T 5 B 2. 
Remember that the Soul knows no difference between being 
and having. 
The higher mind thinks according to the laws which the 
Soul obeys, and therefore honors only the laws of God. 
To Him, get¬ 
ting is meaningless, and giving is all. 
Having everything, the Soul 
HOLDS everything by GIVING it, thus creating as the Father cre¬ 
ated. 


T 5 B 3. 
If you think about it, you will see that, while this kind of 
thinking is totally alien to having THINGS, even to the lower mind 
it is quite comprehensible in connection with IDEAS. 
If you share a 
physical possession, you DO divide its ownership. 
But if you share 
an IDEA, you do NOT lessen it. 
ALL of it is still yours, although all 
of it has been given away. 
Further, if the person to whom you give it 
accepts it as HIS, he reinforces it in YOUR mind, and thus IN¬ 
CREASES it. 


T 5 B 4. 
If you can accept the concept that the world IS one of ideas, 
the whole belief in the false association which the ego has made be¬ 
tween giving and LOSING is gone. 
Let us start our process of re¬ 
awakening 248 with just a few simple concepts: 

Thoughts INCREASE by being given away. 


The more who BELIEVE in them, the STRONGER they become. 


18 In the manuscript the word “rebirth?” is typed between the lines. 
That is not present in the Notes 
however. 



211 


1-201 




Volume I Text 


EVERYTHING is an idea. 


How, then, is it possible that giving and losing can be meaningfully 
associated? T(235) C 62 

T5B5. 
This is the invitation to the Holy Spirit. 
I told you that I could 
reach up and bring the Holy Spirit down to you. 
But I can bring 
Him to you only at your own invitation. 
The Holy Spirit is nothing 
more than your own right mind. 
He was also mine. 
The Bible says, 
"May the mind be in you that was also in Christ Jesus," 249 and uses 
this as a BLESSING. 
It is the blessing of miracle-mindedness. 
It asks 
that you may think as I thought, joining with me in Christ-thinking. 


T5B6. 
The Holy Spirit is the only part of the Holy Trinity which is 
symbolic. 
He is referred to in the Bible as the Healer, the Comforter, 
and the Guide. 
250 He is also described as something separate, apart 
from the Father and from the Son. 
I myself said, "and if I go I will 
send you ANOTHER comforter, and he will abide with you." 

T 5 B 7. 
The Holy Spirit is a difficult concept to grasp, precisely be¬ 
cause it IS symbolic, and therefore open to many different interpre¬ 
tations. 
As a man and as one of God's creations, my right thinking, 
which came from the Universal Inspiration which IS the Holy Spirit, 
taught me first and foremost that this Inspiration is for ALL. 
I could 
not have it myself without knowing that. 


T 5 B 8. 
The word "know" is proper here, because the Holy Inspira¬ 
tion is so close to knowledge that it calls forth, or better, allows it to 
come. 
We have spoken before of the higher or true perception, 
which is so close to truth that God Himself can flow across the little 
gap. 
Knowledge is always ready to flow everywhere, but it cannot 
oppose. 
Therefore you can obstruct it, although you can never lose 
it. 


T 5 B 9. 
The Holy Spirit is the Christ mind that senses the knowledge 
that lies beyond perception. 
It came into being with the separation 

: 19 Philippians 2:5 Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, 

250 John 14:16 “And I will pray the Father, and He will give you another Helper, that He may abide 
with you forever.” 


1-202 


212 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


as a protection, and inspired the beginning of the Atonement at the 
same time. 
Before that, there was no need for healing and no-one 
was comfortless. 


T 5 C. 
The Mind of the Atonement (Notes 525 6:89) 

T 5 c 1 . 
God honored even the miscreations of His Children because 
they had made them. 
But he also blessed them with a way of think¬ 
ing about them that could raise their perceptions until they became 
so lofty that they could reach almost back to Him. 


T 5 c 2. 
The Holy Spirit is the mind of the Atonement. 
It represents a 
state of mind that comes close enough to one-mindedness that trans¬ 
fer is at last possible. 
As you well know, transfer depends on com¬ 
mon elements in the old learning and the new situation to which it 
is transferred. 
T(236) c 63 Perception is not knowledge, but it can be 
TRANSFERRED to knowledge, or CROSS OVER into it. 
It might 
even be more helpful here to use the literal meaning "carried over," 
for the last step is taken by God. 


T 5 C 3. 
The Holy Spirit, the shared Inspiration of all the Sonship, in¬ 
duces a kind of perception in which many elements are like those in 
the Kingdom of Heaven Itself. 


T 5 C 4. 
First, its universality is perfectly clear, and no-one who re¬ 
ceives it could ever believe for one instant that sharing it involves 
anything BUT gain. 


T 5 C 5. 
Second, it is incapable of attack, and is therefore truly open. 

This means that although it does not engender knowledge, it does 
not obstruct it in any way. 
Third, it is an unequivocal call to love. 
Every other 
voice is still. 
251 

T 5 C 6. 
There is a point at which sufficient quantitative changes pro¬ 
duce real qualitative differences. 
The next point requires real under¬ 
standing, because it is the point at which the shift occurs. 


2,1 This line is from the Notes, an apparently inadvertent omission. 



213 


1-203 



Volume I Text 


T 5 C 7. 
Finally, it points the way beyond the healing which it brings, 
and leads the mind beyond its own integration into the paths of 
creation. 


T 5 C 8. 
Healing is not creating; it is reparation. 
The Holy Spirit pro¬ 
motes healing by looking beyond it, to what the children of God 
were before healing was needed, and will be when they have BEEN 
healed. 
This alteration of the time sequence should be quite familiar, 
because it is very similar to the shift in time perception which the 
miracle introduces. 


T 5 C 9. 
The Holy Spirit is the MOTIVATION for miracle- 
mindedness. 
It is the will to HEAL the separation by letting it go. 
It 
is IN you because God placed it in your mind, and although you can 
keep it asleep you cannot obliterate it. 
God Himself keeps it alive by 
transmitting it from His Mind to yours as long as there is time. 
It is 
partly His will and partly yours. 
The miracle itself is just this fusion 
or union of will between Father and Son. 


T 5 c to. 
The Holy Spirit is the Spirit of Joy. 
It is the call to return, 
with which God blessed the minds of the separated Sons. 
This the 
vocation of the mind. 
It had no calling until the separation, because 
before it had only BEING, and would not have understood the call 
to right thinking. 
The Holy T(237) C 64 Spirit was God's answer to the 
separation, the means by which the Atonement could repair until 
the whole mind returned to creating. 
The Atonement and the sepa¬ 
ration began at the same time. 
When man made the ego, God placed 
in him the call of joy. 
This call is so strong that the ego always dis¬ 
solves at its sound. 


T 5 C 11. 
That is why you can choose to listen to two voices within 
you. 
One you made yourself, and that one is not of God. 
But the 
other is given you by God, Who asks you only to listen to it. 
The 
Holy Spirit IS in you in a very literal sense. 
It is the voice that calls 
you back to where you were before and will be again. 



1-204 


214 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


T 5 D. 
The Voice for God (Notes 529 6:93) 

T 5 D l. 
It is possible even in this world to hear ONLY that voice and 
no other. 
It takes effort and great willingness to learn. 
It is the final 
lesson that I learned, and God's Sons are as equal as learners as they 
are as Souls. 
The voice of the Holy Spirit IS the call to Atonement, or 
the restoration of the integrity of the mind. 
When the Atonement is 
complete and the whole Sonship is healed, there will be no call to 
return, but what God creates is eternal. 
The Holy Spirit will remain 
with the Sons of God, to bless THEIR creations and keep them in the 
light of joy. 


T 5 D 2. 
You ARE the Kingdom of Heaven, but you have let the belief 
in darkness enter your minds, and so you need a new light. 
The 
Holy Spirit is the radiance that you must let to banish the idea of 
darkness. 
His is the glory before which dissociation falls away, and 
the Kingdom of Heaven breaks through into its own. 


T 5 D 3. 
Before the separation you did not need guidance. 
You KNEW 
as you will know again, but you do not know now. 
God does not 
guide, because He can share only PERFECT KNOWLEDGE. 
Guid¬ 
ance is EVALUATIVE, because it implies that there is a RIGHT way 
and also a WRONG way, one to be chosen and the other avoided. 


By choosing one, you give up the other. 
This IS a conflict state. 
It 
MEANS that knowledge has been lost, because knowledge is SURE. 

T 5 D 4. 
God is not in you; YOU are part of HIM. 
When you willed to 
leave Him, He gave you a voice to speak FOR Him, because He 
could no longer share His T(238) C 65 knowledge with you without 
hindrance. 
Direct communication was broken, because you had 
made another voice through another will. 
The Holy Spirit calls you 
both to remember and forget. 
You have chosen to be in a state of 
opposition, in which opposites are possible. 
As a result, there ARE 
choices which you must make. 
In the holy state, the will is free in 
the sense that its CREATIVE power is unlimited, but choice itself is 
meaningless. 


T 5 D 5. 
Freedom to choose is the same POWER as freedom to create, 
but its APPLICATION is different. 
Choosing MEANS divided will. 



215 


1-205 



Volume I Text 


The Holy Spirit is one way of choosing. 
This way is in you BE¬ 
CAUSE there is also another way. 
God did not leave His Children 
comfortless, 252 even though they left Him. 
The voice they put in 
their minds was NOT the voice of His Will, for which the Holy 
Spirit speaks. 
The call to return is stronger than the call to depart, 
but it speaks in a different way. 


T 5 D 6. 
The voice of the Holy Spirit does not command, because it is 
incapable of arrogance. 
It does not demand, because it does not seek 
control. 
It does not overcome, because it does not attack. 
It merely 
REMINDS. 
It is compelling only because of what it reminds you OF. 

It brings to your mind the OTHER way, remaining quiet even in the 
midst of the turmoil you have made for yourselves. 
The voice for 
God is always quiet, because it speaks of peace. 
Yet peace is stronger 
than war, because it heals. 
War is DIVISION, not increase. 
No-one 
gains from strife. 


T 5 D 7. 
"What profiteth a man if he gain the whole world and lose 
his own Soul?" 253 This means that if he listens to the wrong voice, he 
has LOST SIGHT of his Soul. 
He CANNOT lose it, but he CAN not 
know it. 
It is therefore LOST TO HIM, until he chooses right. 
The 
Holy Spirit is your guide in choosing. 
He is the part of your mind 
which ALWAYS speaks for the right choice, because he speaks for 
God. 
He is your remaining communication with God, which you 
can interrupt, but cannot destroy. 


T 5 D 8. 
The Holy Spirit is the way in which God's will can be done 
on earth as it is in Heaven. 
254 Both Heaven and Earth are in YOU, 
because the call of both are in your wills, and therefore in your 
minds. 
The voice for God comes from your own altars to Him. 


These altars are not THINGS. 
They are DEVOTIONS. 
T(239) c 66 But 
you have other devotions now. 
Your divided devotion has given 
you the two voices, and you must choose at which altar you will to 


252 John 14:18 “I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you.” 

253 Matthew 16:26 “For what profit is it to a man if he gains the whole world, and loses his own soul? 
Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?” 

254 Matthew 6:10 “Your kingdom come. 
Your will be done On earth as it is in heaven.” 


1-206 


216 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


serve. 
The call you answer now IS an evaluation, because it is a DE¬ 
CISION. 
The decision itself is very simple. 
It is made on the basis of 
which call is worth more to you. 


T 5 D 9. 
My mind will always be like yours, because we were created 
as equals. 
It was only my DECISION that gave me all power in 
Heaven and earth. 
255 My only gift to you is to help you make the 
same decision FOR YOURSELF. 
The will for this decision is the will 
to SHARE it, because the decision itself IS the decision to share. 
It is 
MADE BY GIVING, and is therefore the one act of mind that resem¬ 
bles true creation. 


T 5 D 10. 
You understand the role of models in the learning process, 
and the importance of the models you value and choose to follow in 
determining what you will to learn. 
I am your model for decision. 


By deciding for God, I showed you that this decision CAN be made, 
and that YOU can make it. 
I promised you that the mind that made 
the decision for me is also in YOU, and that you can let it change 
you just as it changed me. 
This mind is unequivocal, because it 
hears only ONE VOICE, and answers in ONE WAY. 


T 5 D ll. 
You are the light of the world with me. 
256 Rest does not come 
from sleeping, but from waking. 
The Holy Spirit is the call to awake 
and be glad. 
The world is very tired, because it is the IDEA of wea¬ 
riness. 
Our task is the joyous one of waking it to the call for God. 

Everyone will answer the call of the Holy Spirit, or the Sonship can¬ 
not be as one. 
What better vocation could there be for any part of the 
Kingdom than to restore it to the perfect integration that can make it 
whole? 

T 5 D 12. 
Hear only this through the Holy Spirit within you, and teach 
your brothers to listen as I am teaching you. 
When you are tempted 
by the wrong voice, call on me to remind you how to heal by shar¬ 
ing my decision and MAKING IT STRONGER. 
As we share this 

255 Matthew 28:18 And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, “All authority has been given to Me in 
heaven and on earth.” 

256 Matthew 5:14 “You are the light of the world. 
A city that is set on a hill cannot be hidden.” 


217 


1-207 



Volume I Text 


goal, we increase its power to attract the whole Sonship, and to 
bring it back into the Oneness in which it was created. 


T 5 D 13. 
Remember that "Yoke" means "join together," and "burden" 
means message. 
Let us reconsider the biblical statement "my yoke 257 
is easy and my burden light" 258 in this way. 
Let us join together, for 
my message is Light. 
T(240) c 671 came to your minds because you 
had grown vaguely aware of the fact that there is another way, or 
another voice. 
Having given this invitation to the Holy Spirit, I 
could come to provide the model for HOW TO THINK. 


T 5 D 14. 
Psychology has become the study of BEHAVIOR, but no-one 
denies the basic law that behavior is a response to MOTIVATION, 
and motivation is will. 
I have enjoined you to behave as I behaved, 
but we must respond to the same mind to do this. 
This mind is the 
Holy Spirit, whose will is for God always. 
It teaches you how to 
keep me as the model for your thought, and behave like me as a re¬ 
sult. 


T 5 D 15. 
The power of our joint motivation is beyond belief, but NOT 
beyond accomplishment. 
What we can accomplish together has no 
limits, because the call for God IS the call to the unlimited. 
Child of 
God, my message is for YOU, to hear and give away as you answer 
the Holy Spirit within you. 
T(241) C 68 259 

T 5 E. 
The Guide to Salvation (Notes 548 6:112) 

T 5 E l. 
The way to LEARN TO KNOW your brother is by perceiving 
the Holy Spirit in him. 
We have already said that the Holy Spirit is 
the bridge or thought-transfer of perception TO knowledge, so we 
CAN use the terms as if they were related, because in HIS mind they 
are. 
This relationship MUST be in His mind, because unless it were, 
the separation between the two ways of thinking would not be open 
to healing. 
He is part of the Holy Trinity, because His Mind is partly 


257 Ur spells this “yolk” 

258 Matthew 11:30 “For My yoke is easy and My burden is light.” 

259 Jan. 
29, ‘66 


1-208 


218 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


YOURS and also PARTLY GOD's. 
This needs clarification not in 
statement, since we have said this before, but in EXPERIENCE. 


T 5 E 2. 
The Holy Spirit is the IDEA of healing. 
Being thought, the 
idea GAINS AS IT IS SHARED. 
Being the call FOR God, it is also the 
idea OF God. 
If you are part of God, it is also the idea of YOUR¬ 
SELF, as well as of all the parts of God. 
The idea of the Holy Spirit 
shares the property of other ideas, because it follows the laws of the 
universe of which IT is a part. 
Therefore, it is strengthened by being 
given away. 
It increases in YOU as you give it to your brothers. 


T 5 E 3. 
Since thoughts do not have to be conscious to exist, your 
brother does NOT have to be AWARE of the Holy Spirit, either in 
himself or in you for this miracle to occur. 
He may have dissociated 
the call for God, just as YOU have. 
But the dissociation is healed in 
BOTH of you as you see it in him, and thus acknowledge its BEING. 

Bill, who has made a number of vital contributions to our joint ven¬ 
ture, made a major one a while ago, which he himself did not appre¬ 
ciate or even understand. 
If we recognize its value together, we will 
be able to use it together, because it is an idea, T(242) c 69 and must 
therefore be shared to be held. 


T 5 E 4. 
When Bill said that he was determined "NOT to see you that 
way," he was speaking negatively. 
If he will state the same idea 
POSITIVELY, he will see the POWER of what he said. 
He had real¬ 
ized that there are two ways of seeing you, and also that they are 
diametrically opposed to one another. 
These two ways must be in 
HIS mind, because he was referring to HIMSELF as the perceiver. 

They must also be in YOURS, because he was perceiving YOU. 


T 5 E 5. 
What he was really saying was that he would NOT look at 
you through HIS ego, or perceive YOUR ego in you. 
Stated posi¬ 
tively, he would see you through the Holy Spirit in HIS mind, and 
perceive it in YOURS. 
What you acknowledge in your brother, you 
ARE acknowledging in yourself. 
What you share you 
STRENGTHEN. 
The voice of the Holy Spirit IS weak in you. 
That is 
why you MUST share it, because it must be INCREASED in strength 
before YOU can hear it. 
It is impossible to hear it in yourself while it 


219 


1-209 



Volume I Text 


is so weak in your OWN mind. 
It is NOT weak in itself; but it IS lim¬ 
ited by your unwillingness to hear it. 


T 5 E 6. 
Will itself is an idea, and is therefore strengthened by being 
shared. 
You have made the mistake of looking for the Holy Spirit in 
YOURSELVES, and that is why your meditations have frightened 
you. 
By adopting the ego's viewpoint, you undertook an ego-alien 
journey WITH THE EGO AS GUIDE. 
This was BOUND to produce 
fear. 
Bill's better idea needs to be strengthened in BOTH of you. 

Since it was HIS, HE can increase it by giving it to you. 
T(243) c 70 

T 5 E 7. 
Delay is of the ego, because time is ITS concept. 
Delay is ob¬ 
viously a TIME idea. 
Both time AND delay are meaningless in eter¬ 
nity. 
We have said before that the Holy Spirit is God's answer to the 
ego. 
Everything of which the Holy Spirit reminds you is in direct 
opposition to the ego's notions, because true and false perceptions 
are THEMSELVES opposed. 
The Holy Spirit has the task of UNDO¬ 
ING what the ego has made. 
It must undo it in the same realm of 
discourse in which the ego itself operates, or the mind would be un¬ 
able to understand the change. 
We have repeatedly emphasized the 
fact that one level of the mind is not understandable to another. 
So it 
is with the ego and the soul, and with time and eternity. 


T 5 E 8. 
Eternity is an idea of God, so the soul understands it per¬ 
fectly. 
Time is a belief of the ego, so the lower mind, which IS the 
ego's domain, accepts it without question. 
The only aspect of time 
which is really eternal is NOW. 
That is what we REALLY mean 
when we say that now is the only time. 
The literal nature of this 
statement does not mean anything to the ego. 
It interprets it, at best, 
to mean "don't worry about the future." This is NOT what it really 
means at all. 


T 5 E 9. 
The Holy Spirit is the mediator between the interpretations of 
the ego and the knowledge of the Soul. 
Its ability to deal with sym¬ 
bols enables it to work AGAINST the ego's beliefs in its own lan¬ 
guage. 
Its equal ability to look BEYOND symbols into eternity also 

enables it to understand the laws of God, for which it speaks. 
T(244) c 
71 


1-210 


220 


Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


T 5 E 10. 
It can thus perform the function of RE-INTERPRETING 
what the ego makes, not by destruction, but by understanding. 
Un¬ 
derstanding is light, and light leads to knowledge. 
The Holy Spirit is 
IN light, because it is IN YOU who ARE light. 
But you yourselves 
do not know this. 
It is therefore the task of the Holy Spirit to re¬ 
interpret you on behalf of God. 


T 5 E li. 
You cannot understand yourselves alone. 
This is because 
you have no meaning apart from your rightful place in the Sonship, 
and the rightful place of the Sonship in God. 
This is your life, your 
eternity, and YOURSELF. 
It is of this that the Holy Spirit reminds 
you. 
It is this that the Holy Spirit SEES. 
This vision invariably fright¬ 
ens the ego, because it is so calm. 
Peace is the ego's greatest enemy, 
because according to ITS interpretation of reality, war is the guaran¬ 
tee of its survival. 
The ego becomes strong in strife because if you 
believe there is strife, you will react viciously because the idea of 
danger has entered your mind. 
This idea itself IS an appeal to the 
ego. 


T 5 E 12. 
The Holy Spirit is as vigilant as the ego to the call of danger, 
opposing it with ITS strength just as the ego WELCOMES it with all 
its might. 
The Holy Spirit counters this welcome by welcoming 
peace. 
Peace and eternity are as closely related as are time and war. 

Perception as well as knowledge derive meaning from RELATION¬ 
SHIPS. 
Those which you accept are the foundations of your beliefs. 

T(245) C 72 

T 5 E 13. 
The Separation is merely another term for a split mind. 
It 
was not an act, but a thought. 
Therefore, the idea of Separation can 
be given away, just as the idea of unity can, and either way, it will 
be STRENGTHENED IN THE MIND OF THE GIVER. 
The ego is the 
symbol of the Separation, just as the Holy Spirit is the symbol of 
peace. 
What you perceive in others you are STRENGTHENING IN 
YOUR SELF. 
You let your mind misperceive, but the Holy Spirit lets 
your mind re-interpret its own misperceptions. 
The Holy Spirit is 
the perfect teacher. 
It uses only what your minds ALREADY under¬ 
stand, to teach you that you do not understand it. 



221 


1-211 


Volume I Text 


T 5 E 14. 
The Holy Spirit can deal with an unwilling learner without 
going counter to his will, because part of his will IS still for God. 
De¬ 
spite the ego's attempts to conceal this part, it is still much stronger 
than the ego, even though the ego does not recognize it. 
The Holy 
Spirit recognizes it perfectly, because it is its own dwelling place, or 
the place in the mind where it is at home. 
YOU are at home there, 
too, because it is a place of peace, and peace is of God. 


T 5 E 15. 
You who are part of God are not at home EXCEPT in His 
peace. 
If peace is eternal, you are at home only in eternity. 
The ego 
made the world as IT perceives it, but the Holy Spirit, the RE¬ 
INTERPRETER of what the ego made, sees it only as a teaching de¬ 
vice for bringing you home. 
The Holy Spirit must perceive time and 
re-interpret into the timeless. 
The mind must be led into eternity 
THROUGH time, because having made time it is capable of perceiv¬ 
ing its opposite. 
T(246) C 73 

T 5 E 16. 
The Holy Spirit must work through opposites, because it 
must work with and for a mind that IS in opposition. 
Correct and 
learn, and be open to learning. 
You have NOT made truth, but truth 
can still set you free. 
260 Look as the Holy Spirit looks, and under¬ 
stand as He understands. 
His understanding looks back to God, in 
remembrance of Me. 
261 He is in Holy Communion always, and He is 
part of YOU. 
He is your guide to salvation, because he holds the 
remembrance of things past and to come. 
He holds this gladness 
gently in your minds, asking only that you INCREASE it in His 
name by sharing it to increase His joy in YOU. 
T(247) C 74 262 

T 5 F. 
Therapy and Teaching (Notes 558 6:122) 

T 5 F l. 
You must have noticed how often I have used your own ideas 
to help YOU. 
B. 
is right is saying that you have learned to be a lov¬ 
ing, wise, and very understanding therapist, except for yourself. 


That exception has given you more than perception for others be- 


260 John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 

261 Luke 22:19 And He took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is My 
body which is given for you; do this in remembrance of Me.” 

262 Jan. 
12, ‘66 


1-212 


222 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


cause of what you saw in them, but less than knowledge of your real 
relationships TO them because you did NOT make them part OF 
you. 
Understanding IS beyond perception, because it introduces 
meaning. 
But it is below knowledge, even though it can grow TO¬ 
WARD it. 
It is possible, with great effort, to understand someone 
else and to be helpful to him, but the effort is misdirected. 
The mis¬ 
direction is quite apparent. 
It is directed AWAY from you. 


T 5 F 2. 
This does NOT mean that it is lost to you, but it DOES mean 
that you are not aware of it. 
I have saved all of your kindnesses and 
every loving thought you have had, and I assure you, you have had 
many. 
I have purified them of errors which hid their light, and have 
kept them for you in their own perfect radiance. 
They are beyond 
destruction and beyond guilt. 
They came from the Holy Spirit 
within YOU, and we know that what God creates is eternal. 


T 5 F 3. 
Bill once spoke of the Kingdom in this way, because he 
yearns for what he has repressed. 
You are much more afraid of it, 
because dissociation is more fearful. 
B's better contact has allowed 
him the strength to retain the fear in awareness, and to resort to dis¬ 
placement, which he is learning to overcome with YOUR help. 
That 
is because you do not perceive HIM as dissociated, and can help 
him with his repression, T(248) C 75 which does not frighten you. 
He, 
on the other hand, has no difficulty in seeing YOU dissociate, and 
does not have to deal with repression in you, which WOULD pro¬ 
duce fear in him. 


T 5 F 4. 
Joining in Atonement, which I have repeatedly asked you to 
do, is ALWAYS a way OUT of fear. 
This does not mean that you can 
safely fail to acknowledge anything that is true, but the Holy Spirit 
will not fail to help you re-interpret EVERYTHING that you per¬ 
ceive as fearful, and teach you ONLY what is loving IS true. 
It is be¬ 
yond your ability to destroy, but entirely within your grasp. 
It BE¬ 
LONGS to you because YOU created it. 
It is yours because it is part 
of you, just as you are part of God, because He created you. 


T 5 F 5. 
The Atonement is the GUARANTEE of the safety of the 
Kingdom. 
Nothing good is lost, because it comes from the Holy 


223 


1-213 


Volume I Text 


Spirit, the voice for Creation. 
Nothing that is not good was ever cre¬ 
ated, and therefore CANNOT be protected. 
What the ego makes it 
KEEPS TO ITSELF, and so it is without strength. 
Its unshared exis¬ 
tence does not die. 
It was merely never born. 
Real birth is not a be¬ 
ginning; it is a CONTINUING. 
Everything that CAN continue has 
already BEEN born. 
But it can INCREASE as you are willing to re¬ 
turn the part of your mind that needs healing to the higher part, and 
thus render your creating (creation) undivided. 


T 5 F 6. 
You yourself always told your patients that the real difference 
between neurotic and 'healthy' guilt feelings was that neurotic guilt 
feelings DO NOT HELP ANYONE. 
This distinction was very wise, 
though incomplete. 
Let us make the distinction a little sharper now. 

T(249) c 76 Neurotic guilt feelings are a device of the ego for "aton¬ 
ing" without sharing, and for asking for pardon without change. 


The ego NEVER calls for real atonement, and cannot tolerate real 
forgiveness, which IS change. 


T 5 F 7. 
Your concept of "healthy guilt feelings" has great merit, but 
without the concept of the Atonement it lacked the healing potential 
it held. 
YOU make the distinction in terms of feelings which led to a 
decision not to REPEAT the error, which is only PART of healing. 

Your concept therefore lacked the idea of UNDOING it. 
What you 
were really advocating, then, was adopting a policy of sharing 
without a real FOUNDATION. 


T 5 F 8.1 have come to give you the foundation, so your own 
thoughts can make you REALLY free . 
263 You have carried the bur¬ 
den of the ideas you did NOT share, and which were therefore too 
weak to increase, but you did NOT recognize how to UNDO their 
existence because you HAD made them. 
You CANNOT cancel out 
your past errors alone. 
They will NOT disappear from your mind 
without remedy. 
The remedy is NOT of your making, any more 
than YOU are. 



263 John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 


1-214 


224 




Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


T 5 F 9. 
The Atonement cannot be understood except as a PURE ACT 
OF SHARING. 
That is what is meant when we said that it is possible 
even in this world to listen to ONE voice. 
If you are part of God, and 
the Sonship is one, you CANNOT be limited to the self the ego sees. 

Every loving thought held in ANY part (of the Sonship) belongs to 
every part. 
T(250) C 77 It is shared BECAUSE it is loving. 
Sharing is 
God's way of creating, and also YOURS. 
Your ego can keep you in 
exile FROM the Kingdom but in the Kingdom itself it has no power. 


T 5 F to. 
You have become willing to receive my messages as I give 
them, without interference by the ego, so we can clarify an earlier 
point which was mentioned before. 
We said that you will one day 
teach as much as you learn, and that will keep you in balance. 
The 
time is now, because you have let it be now. 
You cannot learn EX¬ 
CEPT by teaching. 
I heard one voice because I had learned that 
learning is attained BY teaching. 
I understood that I COULD NOT 
ATONE FOR MYSELF ALONE. 


T 5 F li. 
Listening to one voice MEANS the will to share the voice to 
hear it yourself. 
The mind that was in me is still irresistibly drawn to 
every mind created by God, because God's wholeness IS the whole¬ 
ness of his Son . 
264 Turning the other cheek 265 does NOT mean that 
you should submit to violence without protest. 
It means that you 
cannot be hurt, and do not want to show your brother anything ex¬ 
cept your wholeness. 
Show him that he CANNOT hurt you, and 
hold nothing against him, or you hold it against yourself. 


T 5 F 12. 
Teaching is done in many ways, by formal means, by guid¬ 
ance, and above all BY EXAMPLE. 
If you will to learn, you MUST 
will to teach. 
Teaching is therapy because it means the sharing of 
ideas, and the awareness that to share them is to strengthen them. 

The union of the Sonship IS its protection. 
T(25l) C 78 The ego cannot 
prevail against the Kingdom BECAUSE it is united , 266 and the ego 


21,4 Philippians 2:5 Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, 

265 Matthew 5:39 “But I tell you not to resist an evil person. 
But whoever slaps you on your right 
cheek, turn the other to him also.” 

266 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 


225 


1-215 



Volume I Text 


fades away and is undone in the presence of the attraction of the 
parts of the Sonship which hear the call of the Holy Spirit to be as 
One. 


T 5 F 13.1 cannot forget my need to teach what I have learned which 
arose in me BECAUSE I learned it. 
I call upon you to teach what you 
have learned, because by so doing YOU can depend on it. 
Make it 
dependable in my name, because my name is the name of God's 
Son. 
What I learned I give you freely, and the mind which was in 
me rejoices as YOU will to hear it. 
The Holy Spirit atones in all of us 
by UNDOING, and thus lifts the burden you have placed in your 
mind. 
By following Him, He leads you back to God where you be¬ 
long. 
And how can you find this way except by taking your brother 
with you? 

T 5 F 14. 
My part in the Atonement is not complete until YOU join it, 
and give it away. 
As you teach, so shall you learn. 
I will never leave 
you or forsake you, because to forsake you would be to forsake my¬ 
self and God who created me . 
267 You will forsake yourselves and 
your God if you forsake any of YOUR brothers. 
You are more than 
your brother's keeper. 
In fact, you do not WANT to keep him. 
You 
must learn to see him as he is, and KNOW that he belongs to God, 
as you do. 
How could you treat your brother better than by render¬ 
ing unto God 268 the things which are God's? 

T 5 F 15. 
Ideas do not LEAVE the mind which thought them in order 
to have separate being. 
Nor do separate thoughts conflict with one 
another in space, because they do not occupy space at all. 
T(252) c 79 
HUMAN ideas can conflict in content, because they occur at differ¬ 
ent levels, and include opposite thoughts at the SAME level. 
IT IS 
IMPOSSIBLE TO SHARE OPPOSING THOUGHTS. 
The Holy Spirit 
does not LET you forsake your brothers. 
Therefore, you can really 
share only the parts of your thoughts which are of Him, which He 


161 Hebrews 13:5 Let your conduct be without covetousness; be content with such things as you have. 

For He Himself has said, “I will never leave you nor forsake you.” 

268 Matthew 22:21 They said to Him, “Caesar’s.” And He said to them, “Render therefore to Caesar the 
things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” 


1-216 


226 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


also keeps for YOU. 
And of such is the Kingdom of Heaven . 
269 All 
the rest remains with you until He has re-interpreted them in the 
light of the Kingdom, making them, too, worthy of being shared. 

When they have been sufficiently purified. 
He lets you give them 
away. 
The will to share them IS their purification. 


T 5 F16. 
The Atonement gives you the power of a healed mind, but 
the power to create is of God. 
Therefore, those who have been for¬ 
given must devote themselves first to healing, because having RE¬ 
CEIVED the idea of healing they MUST give it to hold it. 
The full 
power of creation (creating) cannot be expressed as long as any of 
God's ideas are withholding it from the Kingdom. 
The joint will of 
ALL the Sonship is the only creator that can create like the Father. 

That is because only the complete can think completely, and the 
thinking of God lacks nothing. 
Everything YOU think that is not 
through the Holy Spirit IS lacking. 


T 5 F17. 
How can you who are so Holy suffer? All your past, except 
its beauty, is gone, and nothing is left except a blessing. 
You can in¬ 
deed depart in peace , 270 because I have loved you as I loved my¬ 
self . 
271 You go WITH my blessing and FOR my blessing. 
Hold it and 
share it, that it may always be ours. 
I place the peace of God in your 
heart, and in your hands, to hold and share. 
The heart is pure to 
hold it, and the hands are strong to give it. 
We cannot lose. 
My 
judgment is as strong as the wisdom of God, T(253) C 80 in whose 
Heart and Hands we have our being . 
272 His quiet children are His 
blessed sons. 
The Thoughts of God are with you. 
T(254) c 81 


269 Matthew 19:14 But Jesus said, “Let the little children come to Me, and do not forbid them; for of 
such is the kingdom of heaven.” 

270 Luke 2:29 Lord, now You are letting Your servant depart in peace, According to Your word; 

271 Luke 10:27 And he answering said, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself.” 

272 Acts 17:28 for in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have 
said, “For we are also His offspring.” 


227 


1-217 



Volume I Text 

T 5 G. 
The Two Decisions (Notes 569 6:133) 

T 5 G 1. 
Perhaps 273 this will become clearer and more personally 
meaningful if the ego's use of guilt is clarified. 
The ego has a pur¬ 
pose, just as the Holy Spirit has. 
The ego's purpose is FEAR, because 
only the fearful can be egotistic. 
The ego's logic is as impeccable as 
that of the Holy Spirit, because your mind has all the means at its 
disposal to side with Heaven or earth, as it elects. 
But let us again 
remember that both are in you. 


T 5 G 2. 
In Heaven there is no guilt, because the Kingdom is attained 
through the Atonement, which creates it in you. 
The word "create" 
is appropriate here, because once what YOU have made is undone 
by the Holy Spirit, the blessed residue IS restored, and therefore 
continues in creation. 
What is truly blessed is incapable of giving 
rise to guilt, and must give rise to joy. 
This makes it invulnerable to 
the ego, because its peace is unassailable. 
It is invulnerable to dis¬ 
ruption BECAUSE it is whole. 


T 5 G 3. 
Guilt is ALWAYS disruptive. 
Anything that engenders fear is 
divisive, because it obeys the law of division. 
If the ego is the sym¬ 
bol of the separation, it is also the symbol of guilt. 
Guilt is more than 
merely not of God. 
It is the symbol of the ATTACK on God. 
This is a 
totally meaningless concept EXCEPT to the ego, but do not underes¬ 
timate the power of the ego's belief in it. 
This is the belief from 
which ALL guilt really stems. 
T(255) C 82 

T 5 G 4. 
The ego IS the part of the mind which believes in division. 


But how can part of God detach itself WITHOUT believing it is at¬ 
tacking Him? We spoke before of the authority problem as involv¬ 
ing the concept of USURPING His power. 
The ego believes that this 
is what YOU did, because it believes it IS you. 
It follows, then, that if 
you identify WITH the ego, you MUST perceive yourself as guilty. 


T 5 G 5. 
Whenever you respond to your ego, you WILL experience 
guilt, and you WILL fear punishment. 
The ego is quite literally a 
fearful thought. 
And however ridiculous the idea of attacking God 


273 Feb. 
21/66 


1-218 


228 




Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


may be to the sane mind, never forget that the ego is NOT SANE. 
It 
REPRESENTS a delusional system, and it speaks FOR it. 
Listening 
to the ego's voice MEANS that you believe it is possible to attack 
God. 
You believe that a part of Him has been torn away by YOU. 


T 5 G 6. 
The classic picture of fear of retaliation from without then 
follows, because the severity of the guilt is so acute that it MUST be 
projected. 
Although Freud was wrong about the basic conflict itself, 
he was very accurate in describing its effects. 
Whatever you accept 
INTO your mind has reality for you. 
It is, however, only the AC¬ 
CEPTANCE which makes it real. 


T 5 G 7. 
As an extreme example of dissociation yourself, you should 
have little trouble in understanding that it is perfectly possible not 
to ACCEPT what IS in your minds. 
T(256) C 83 If you enthrone the 
ego in it, the fact that you have accepted it, or allowed it to enter, 
MAKES IT YOUR REALITY. 
This is because the mind as God cre¬ 
ated it IS capable of creating reality. 
We said before that you must 
learn to think WITH God. 
To think WITH Him is to think LIKE 
Him. 
This engenders joy, not guilt, because it is natural. 
Guilt is a 
sure sign that your thinking is Unnatural. 
Perverted thinking will 
ALWAYS be attended with guilt, because it IS the belief in sin. 


T 5 G 8. 
The ego does not perceive sin as a lack of love. 
It perceives it 
as a POSITIVE ACT OF ASSAULT. 
This is an interpretation which is 
necessary to its survival, because as soon as YOU regard it as a 
LACK, you will automatically attempt to remedy the situation. 
And 
you will also succeed. 
The ego regards this as doom, but YOU must 
learn to regard it as freedom. 


T 5 G 9. 
The guiltless mind cannot suffer. 
Being sane, it heals the 
body because IT has been healed. 
The sane mind cannot conceive of 
illness, because it cannot conceive of attacking anything or anyone. 

We said before that illness is a form of magic. 
It might be better to 
say it is a form of magical SOLUTION. 
The ego believes that by pun¬ 
ishing ITSELF, it will mitigate the punishment of God. 
Yet even in 
this it is arrogant. 
It attributes to God a punishing attempt, and then 
takes over this intent as its OWN prerogative. 
It tries to usurp ALL 


229 


1-219 


Volume I Text 


the functions of God as it perceives them, because it recognizes that 
only total allegiance can be trusted. 
T(257) C 84 

T 5 G to. 
The ego cannot OPPOSE the laws of God, any more than 
YOU can. 
But it can INTERPRET them according to what it wants, 
just as YOU can. 
That is why the question "what DO you want" 
must be answered. 
You ARE answering it every minute and every 
second, and each moment of decision is a judgment which is any¬ 
thing BUT ineffectual. 
Its effects will follow automatically UNTIL 
THE DECISION IS CHANGED. 
This is a redundant statement, be¬ 
cause you have NOT learned it. 
But again, any decision can be Un¬ 
made as well as made. 


T 5 G ll. 
But remember that the ALTERNATIVES are unalterable. 


The Holy Spirit, like the ego, is a decision. 
Together they constitute 
all the alternatives which your mind CAN accept and obey. 
The ego 
and the Holy Spirit are the ONLY choices which are open to you. 

God created one, and so you cannot eradicate it. 
YOU made the 
other, so you CAN. 
Only what God creates is irreversible and un¬ 
changeable. 
What YOU have made can always be changed, because 
when you do not think LIKE God, you have not really thought at all. 

Delusional ideas are NOT thought, but you CAN think that you be¬ 
lieve in them. 


T 5 G 12. 
But you are wrong. 
The function of thought comes FROM 
God and is IN God. 
As part of HIS thought, you cannot think 
APART from Him. 
Irrational thought is a thought DISORDER. 
God 
Himself orders your thought, because your thought was created BY 
Him. 
274 T(258) c 85 Guilt feelings are always a sign that you do not 
know this. 
They also show that you believe you CAN think apart 
from God, and WANT to. 


T 5 G 13. 
Every thought disorder is attended by guilt at its inception, 
and MAINTAINED by guilt in its continuance. 
Guilt is inescapable 
for those who believe that they order their OWN thought, and must 
therefore obey its orders. 
This makes them feel RESPONSIBLE for 

274 March 6, 1966 


1-220 


230 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


their mind ERRORS, without recognizing that by ACCEPTING this 
responsibility they are really reacting Irresponsibly. 
If the sole re¬ 
sponsibility of the miracle-worker is to accept the ATONEMENT, 
and I assure you that it is, then the responsibility for what is atoned 
FOR CANNOT be yours. 


T 5 G 14. 
This contradiction cannot BE resolved except by accepting 
the solution of undoing. 
You WOULD be responsible for the effects 
of all your wrong thinking IF IT COULD NOT BE UNDONE. 
The 
purpose of the Atonement is to save the past in PURIFIED form 
only. 
If you accept the remedy FOR a thought-disorder, and a rem¬ 
edy whose efficacy is beyond doubt, how can its symptoms remain? 
You have reason to question the validity of symptom cure. 
But NO 
ONE believes that the symptoms can remain if the underlying 
CAUSE is removed. 


T 5 H. 
Time and Eternity (Notes 577 6:141) 

T 5 H l. 
The CONTINUING will to remain separated is the only pos¬ 
sible reason for continuing guilt feelings. 
We have said this before, 
but we did not emphasize the destructive results of this decision at 
that time. 
ANY decision of the mind will affect both behavior AND 
experience. 
And what you will you EXPECT. 
This is NOT delu¬ 
sional. 
T(259) c 86 Your mind DOES create your future, and CAN 
turn it back to full creation at any minute, IF IT ACCEPTS THE 
ATONEMENT FIRST. 
It will also turn back to full creation the in¬ 
stant it has done so. 
Having given up its thought DISORDER, the 
proper ordering of thought becomes quite apparent. 


T 5 H 2. 
God in His knowledge is not waiting. 
But His Kingdom IS 
bereft while YOU wait. 
All the Sons of God are waiting for your re¬ 
turn, just as YOU are waiting for THEIRS. 
Delay does not matter in 
eternity, but it IS tragic in time. 
You have elected to be in time rather 
than in eternity, and have therefore changed your belief in your 
status. 
But election is both free and alterable. 
You do NOT belong in 
time. 
Your place is ONLY in eternity, where God Himself placed 
you forever. 



231 


1-221 


Volume I Text 


T 5 H 3. 
Guilt feelings are the PRESERVERS of time. 
They induce 
fears of FUTURE retaliation or abandonment, and thus ensure that 
the future will remain like the past. 
This IS the ego's continuity, and 
gives it a false sense of security through the belief that you cannot 
escape from it. 
But you can and MUST. 
God offers you the continu¬ 
ity of eternity in exchange. 
When you will to make this exchange, 
you will simultaneously exchange guilt for peace, viciousness for 
love, and pain for joy. 


T 5 H 4. 
My role is only to unchain your will and make it free. 
Your 
egos cannot accept this freedom, and will oppose your free decision 
at every possible moment, and in every possible way. 
T(260) C 87 And 
as its maker, you KNOW what it can do, because you GAVE IT the 
ability to do it. 
The mind does indeed know its power, because the 
mind does indeed know God. 
Remember the Kingdom always, and 
remember that you who are part of it cannot BE lost. 
The mind that 
was in me IS in you, 275 for God creates with perfect fairness. 
Let the 
Holy Spirit remind you always of His fairness, and let me teach you 
how to share it with your brothers. 
How else can the chance to claim 
it for yourself be given you? 

T 5 H 5. 
What you do not understand is that the two voices speak for 
different interpretations of the same thing simultaneously, or almost 
simultaneously, for the ego always speaks first. 
Alternate interpreta¬ 
tions are unnecessary until the first one has been made, and speak¬ 
ing itself was unnecessary before the ego was made. 
The ego speaks 
in judgment, and the Holy Spirit reverses its decisions, much as the 
Supreme Court has the power to reverse the lower court's decision 
about the laws of this world. 


T 5 H 6. 
The ego's decisions are ALWAYS wrong, because they are 
based on a complete fallacy which they are made to uphold. 
NOTH¬ 
ING it perceives is interpreted correctly. 
Not only does it cite scrip¬ 
ture for its purpose, but it even interprets scripture as a witness for 
itself. 
The Bible is a fearful thing to the ego, because of its prejudiced 

” 75 Philippians 2:5 Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, 


1-222 


232 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


judgment. 
Perceiving it as fearful, it interprets it fearfully. 
Having 
made YOU afraid, you do not appeal to the higher court, because 
you believe its judgment would be AGAINST you. 
T(26l) c 88 

T 5 H 7. 
We need cite only a few examples to see how the ego's inter¬ 
pretations have mislead you. 
A favorite ego quotation is "As ye sow, 
so shall ye reap." 276 Another is "Vengeance is mine sayeth the 
Lord." 277 Still another is "I will visit the sins of the fathers unto the 
third and the fourth generation." 278 And also, "The wicked shall per¬ 
ish." 279 There are many others, but if you will let the Holy Spirit re¬ 
interpret these in its own light, they will suffice. 


T 5 H 8. 
"As ye sow, so shall ye reap" merely means that what you 
believe to be worth cultivating you will cultivate in yourself. 
Your 
judgment of what is worthy DOES make it worthy for you. 


T 5 H 9. 
"Vengeance is mine sayeth the Lord" is easily explained if 
you remember that ideas increase only by being shared. 
This quota¬ 
tion therefore emphasizes the fact that vengeance CANNOT be 
shared. 
Give it therefore to the Holy Spirit, who will undo it in you 
because it does not BELONG in your mind, which is part of God. 


T 5 H 10. 
"I will visit the sins of the fathers unto the third and fourth 
generation," as interpreted by the ego, is particularly vicious. 
It is 
used, in fact, as an attempt to guarantee its survival beyond itself. 

Actually, all it really means is that the Holy Spirit in later genera¬ 
tions retains the power to interpret CORRECTLY what former gen¬ 
erations have thought, and thus release THEIR thoughts from the 
ability to produce fear ANYWHERE in the Sonship. 
T(262) c 89 


216 2 Corinthians 9:6 But this I say: He who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and he who sows 
bountifully will also reap bountifully. 


277 Deuteronomy 32:35 Vengeance is Mine, and recompense; Their foot shall slip in due time; For the 
day of their calamity is at hand, And the things to come hasten upon them.' 

Romans 12:19 Beloved, do not avenge yourselves, but rather give place to wrath; for it is written, 
“Vengeance is Mine, I will repay,” says the Lord. 


278 Exodus 34:7 Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, by no 
means clearing the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children and the children’s 
children to the third and the fourth generation.” 

279 Psalm 37:20 But the wicked shall perish; And the enemies of the LORD, Like the splendor of the 
meadows, shall vanish. 
Into smoke they shall vanish away. 



233 


1-223 




Volume I Text 


T 5 H ll"The wicked shall perish" is merely a statement of fact, if the 
word "perish" is properly understood. 
Every loveless thought 
MUST be undone, and even the word "undone" is fearful to the ego, 
which interprets "I am undone" as "I am destroyed." The ego will 
NOT be destroyed, because it is part of YOUR thought. 
But because 
it is uncreative, and therefore unsharing, it WILL be re-interpreted 
entirely, to release you from fear. 


T 5 H 12. 
The part of your thought which you have given TO the ego 
will merely return to the Kingdom, where your whole mind BE¬ 
LONGS. 
The ego is a form of ARREST, but arrest is merely delay. 
It 
does NOT involve the concept of police at all, although the ego wel¬ 
comes that interpretation. 
You CAN delay the completion of the 
Kingdom, but you CANNOT introduce the concept of ASSAULT 
into it. 


T 5 H 13. 
When I said "I am come as a light into the world," 280 1 surely 
came to share this light with you. 
Remember the symbolic reference 
we made before to the ego's dark glass, and remember also that we 
said "Do not look there." It is still true that "Where you look to find 
yourself is up to you." The Higher Court will not condemn you. 
It 
will merely dismiss the case against you. 
There can BE no case 
against a child of God, and every witness to guilt in God's creations 
is bearing false witness 281 to God Himself. 


T 5 H 14. 
Appeal everything you believe gladly to God's own Higher 
Court, because it speaks for Him, and therefore speaks truly. 
It 
WILL dismiss the case against you, however carefully YOU have 
built it. 
T(263) C 90 The case may be fool-proof, but it is NOT God- 
proof. 
The voice for God will not hear it at all, because it can only 
witness truly. 
Its verdict will always be "Thine is the Kingdom," 282 
because it was given you to remind you of what you ARE. 



280 John 12:46 “I have come as a light into the world, that whoever believes in Me should not abide in 
darkness.” 

281 Exodus 20:16 You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor. 


282 Matthew 6:13 “And do not lead us into temptation, 

But deliver us from the evil one. 


For Thine is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever. 
Amen.” 


1-224 


234 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


T 5 H 15. 
Your patience with each other is your patience with your 
selves. 
Is not a child of God worth patience? I have shown you infi¬ 
nite patience, because my will IS that of our Father, from whom I 
learned of infinite patience. 
His voice was in me, as it is in you, 
speaking for patience toward the Sonship, in the name of its Creator. 

What you need to learn now is that only infinite patience CAN pro¬ 
duce immediate effects. 
This is the way in which time is exchanged 
for eternity. 
Infinite patience calls upon infinite Love, and by pro¬ 
ducing results NOW renders time unnecessary. 


T 5 H 16. 
To say that time is temporary is merely redundant. 
We have 
repeatedly said that time is a learning device which will be abol¬ 
ished when it is no longer useful. 
The Holy Spirit, who speaks for 
God in time, also knows that time is meaningless. 
He reminds you 
of this in every passing moment of time, because it is His special 
function to return YOU to eternity and remain to bless YOUR crea¬ 
tions there. 
He is the only blessing you can truly give, because He is 
so truly blessed. 
And because He has been given you so freely by 
God, you must give Him as you received Him. 
T(264) c 91 

T 5 I. 
The Eternal Fixation (Notes 586 6:150) 

T 5 11 . 
The concept of "set" is among the better psychological per¬ 
cepts. 
Actually, it is used quite frequently in the Bible, and also here, 
under many different terms. 
"God will keep him in perfect peace 
whose mind is stayed (or set) on Thee because he trusteth in 
Thee." 283 

T 512. 
The pronouns here are confusing without explanation, and 
the attempt to shift "Thee" to "Him" is a misinterpretation. 
The 
statement means that God's peace is set in the Holy Spirit, because it 
is fixed on God. 
It is also fixed in you. 
You, then, ARE fixed in the 
peace of God. 


T 513. 
The concept of "fixation" is a very helpful one, which Freud 
understood perfectly. 
Unfortunately, he lost his understanding be- 


283 Isaiah 26:3 Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee\ because he trusteth 
in thee. 



235 


1-225 



Volume I Text 


cause he was afraid, and as you know all too well, fear is incompati¬ 
ble with good judgment. 
Fear DISTORTS thinking, and therefore 
Disorders thought. 
Freud's system of thought was extremely ingen¬ 
ious, because Freud was extremely ingenious. 
A mind MUST endow 
its thoughts with its own attributes. 
This is its inherent STRENGTH, 
even though it may misuse its power. 


T 514. 
Freud lost much of the potential value of his own thought sys¬ 
tem because, much like Cayce, he did NOT include himself in it. 


This IS a dissociated state, because the thinker cuts himself off from 
his thoughts. 
Freud's thought was so conflicted that he could not 
have retained his sanity as HE saw it WITHOUT dissociating. 
T(265) 

C 92 This is why the many contradictions which are quite apparent in 
his thinking became increasingly less apparent to HIM. 


T 51 5. 
A man who knows what fixation REALLY means and does 
NOT yield to it is terribly afraid. 
Fixation is the pull of God, on 
whom your mind IS fixed because of the Fioly Spirit's irrevocable 
set. 
"Irrevocable" means "cannot be called back or redirected." The 
irrevocable nature of the Holy Spirit's set is the basis for its un¬ 
equivocal voice. 
The Holy Spirit NEVER changes its mind. 
Clarity of 
thought CANNOT occur under conditions of vacillation. 
Unless a 
mind is fixed in its purpose, it is NOT clear. 
But clarity literally 
means the state of light, and enlightenment IS understanding. 
It 
stands UNDER perception because you have denied it as the REAL 
foundation of thought. 
This is the basis for ALL delusional systems. 


T 516. 
The concept of fixation, as Freud saw it, has a number of real 
learning advantages. 
First, it recognizes that man CAN be fixated at 
a point in development which does NOT accord with a point in 
time. 
This clearly could have been a means toward real release from 
the time belief, had Freud pursued it with an open mind. 
But Freud 
suffered all his life from refusal to allow eternity to dawn upon his 
mind, and enlighten it truly. 
As a result, he overlooked NOW en¬ 
tirely, and merely saw the continuity of past and future. 


T 517. 
Second, although he misinterpreted what the Holy Spirit told 
him, or better, reminded him of, he was too honest to deny more 


1-226 


236 


Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


than he had to, to keep his fear in tolerable bounds, as he perceived 
the situation. 
Therefore, he EMPHASIZED that the point in devel¬ 
opment at which the mind is fixated is more real to ITSELF than the 
external reality with which it Disagrees. 
T(266) c 93 This again could 
have been a powerful RELEASE mechanism, had Freud not decided 
to involve it in a strong defense system because he perceived it as an 
attack. 


T 518. 
Third, although Freud interpreted fixation as irrevocable dan¬ 
ger points to which the mind can always regress, the concept can 
also be interpreted as an irrevocable call to sanity which the mind 
cannot LOSE. 
Freud saw return as a threat to maturity because he 
did not understand prodigality. 
He merely interpreted it as squan¬ 
dering. 
Actually, "prodigal" also means careful. 
This confusion be¬ 
tween careful and careless led him to confuse the escape from care 
with something desirable. 
In fact, he even went so far as to equate it 
quite literally WITH desire. 


T 519. 
But throughout his thought-system, the "threat" of fixation 
remained, and could never be completely eliminated by any living 
human being anywhere. 
Essentially, this was the basis of his pessi¬ 
mism. 
This was personally as well as theoretically the case. 
Freud 
tried every means his very inventive mind could devise to set up a 
form of therapy which could enable the mind to escape from fixa¬ 
tion forever, even though he KNEW this was impossible. 
The 
knowledge plagued his belief in his own thought-system at every 
turn, because he was both an honest man and a healer. 
He was 
therefore only PARTIALLY insane at the perceptual level, and was 
unable to relinquish the hope of release even though he could not 
cope with it. 
284 T(267) C 94 

T 51 to. 
The reason for this amount of detail is because YOU are in 
the same position. 
You were eternally fixated on God in your crea¬ 
tion, and the pull of this fixation is so strong that you will never 


2S4 The word “it” is missing from the Urtext manuscript but is present in the Notes. 
Nothing else 
appears missing here. 



237 


1-227 



Volume I Text 


overcome it. 
The reason is perfectly clear. 
The fixation is on a level 
that is so high that it cannot BE surmounted. 
You are ALWAYS be¬ 
ing pulled back to your Creator because you belong in Him. 


T 51 ll. 
Do you REALLY believe you can make a voice that can 
drown out His? Do you REALLY believe that you can devise a 
thought-system which can separate you from His? Do you REALLY 
believe that you can plan for your safety and joy better than He can? 
You need be neither careful nor careless. 
You need merely cast all 
your cares upon Him because He careth for YOU. 
285 You ARE His 
care because He loves you. 
His voice reminds you always that all 
hope is yours BECAUSE of His care. 


T 5112. 
You CANNOT choose to escape His care, because that is not 
His will. 
But you CAN choose to accept His care, and use the infi¬ 
nite power OL His care for all those He created BY it. 
There have 
been many healers who did not heal themselves. 
They have not 
moved mountains 286 by their faith because their faith was not 287 
WHOLE. 
Some of them have healed the sick 288 at times, but they 
have not raised the dead. 
Unless the healer heals HIMSELL, he does 
NOT believe that there is no order in miracles. 
He has not learned 
that EVERY mind that God created is equally worthy of being 
healed because GOD CREATED IT WHOLE. 
T(268) c 95 


285 1 Peter 5:7 Casting all your care upon Him, for He cares for you. 


286 Matthew 17:20 So Jesus said to them, “Because of your unbelief; for assuredly, I say to you, if you 
have faith as a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, “Move from here to there,' and it will move; 
and nothing will be impossible for you. 


287 The Ur manuscript is illegible between the words “faith” and “whole.” The Notes has “was not.” 

288 Isaiah 26:19 Your dead shall live; Together with my dead body they shall arise. 
Awake and sing, 
you who dwell in dust; For your dew is like the dew of herbs, And the earth shall cast out the dead. 

Isaiah 35:5-6 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, And the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. 

Then the lame shall leap like a deer, 

And the tongue of the dumb sing. 
For waters shall burst forth in the wilderness, And streams in the 
desert. 


Matthew 10:1 And when He had called His twelve disciples to Him, He gave them power over unclean 
spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all kinds of sickness and all kinds of disease. 


Matthew 10:8 “Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out demons. 
Freely you have 
received, freely give.” 

Matthew 11:5 “The blind see and the lame walk; the lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear; the dead are 
raised up and the poor have the gospel preached to them.” There are many more references to healing 
and raising the dead in the Bible. 



1-228 


238 



Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 


T 5113. 
You are asked merely to return to God the mind as HE cre¬ 
ated it. 
He asks you only for what He gave, knowing that this giving 
will heal YOU. 
Sanity IS wholeness. 
And the sanity of your brothers 
IS yours. 
Why should you listen to the endless insane calls which 
you think are made upon you, when you KNOW the voice of God 
Himself is in you? God commended His Spirit to you, and asks that 
you commend yours to Him. 
He wills to keep it in perfect peace be¬ 
cause you are of one mind and Spirit with Him. 
289 

T 5114. 
Excluding yourself from the Atonement is the ego's last-ditch 
defense of its own existence. 
It reflects both the ego's need to sepa¬ 
rate, and your willingness to side with its separateness. 
This will¬ 
ingness means that YOU DO NOT WANT TO BE HEALED. 
When I 
told Bill that there is "just one more thing," he heard me very well. 
I 
hope he will hear me as well now. 
His intelligent mis-hearing of 
"river" as "rivet" showed that, even though he wanted release, he 
was not able to cope with it at the time. 


T 5115. 
But the time IS now. 
You have not been asked to work out 
the Plan of Salvation yourselves, because, as I told you before, the 
Remedy is NOT of your making. 
God Himself gave you the perfect 
correction for everything you have made which is not in accord with 
His Holy Will. 
I have made His Plan perfectly clear and perfectly 
explicit to you, and have also told you of your part in His Plan and 
how urgent it is that you fulfill it. 


T 5116. 
There is time for delay, but there need not be. 
God weeps at 
the sacrifice of His children who believe they are lost to Him. 
The 
"one more thing" that Bill must learn is merely that he is NOT the 
one more. 
He is both ONE and AT ONE. 
If he will learn this NOW, 
he will be willing in accord with the last judgment, which is really 
only the Biblical reminder of the inevitability of self-INCLUSION. 

This is what "Physician, heal thyself" really means. 
Bill has fre¬ 
quently observed for HIMSELF that this is hard to do. 
He has, how- 


289 Psalm 31:5 Into Your hand I commend my spirit; You have redeemed me, O LORD God of truth. 

Luke 23:46 And when Jesus had cried out with a loud voice, He said, “Father, “into Your hands I 
commend My spirit.”' Having said this, He breathed His last. 



239 


1-229 



Volume I Text 


ever, been perfectly aware of T(269) c 96 JUST what YOU should do 
about it. 


T 5117. 
You might ask him for me whether he does not think he 
might be dissociating HIMSELF from his own awareness, since he is 
so clear about the remedy for YOU. 
You might also remind him that 
to whatever extent he separates himself from you, he is separating 
himself from ME. 
This IS a collaborative venture. 
Let me therefore 
return his own ideas to him, so that you can share them and thus 
help each other to help me. 


T 5118. 
But let me first remind you of something I told you myself. 

Whenever you are not wholly joyous, it is because you have reacted 
with a lack of love to some Soul which God created. 
Perceiving this 
as sin, you become defensive because you EXPECT ATTACK. 
The 
decision to react in that way, however, was YOURS, and can there¬ 
fore be undone. 
It CANNOT be undone by repentance in the usual 
sense, because this implies guilt. 
If you allow yourself to feel guilty, 
you will reinforce the error, rather than allowing it to be undone 
FOR you. 


T 5119. 
Decisions CANNOT be difficult. 
This is obvious if you real¬ 
ize that you must ALREADY have made a decision NOT to be 
wholly joyous if that is what you feel. 
Therefore, the first step in the 
undoing is to recognize that YOU ACTIVELY DECIDED 
WRONGLY, BUT CAN AS ACTIVELY DECIDE OTHERWISE. 


T 5120. 
Be very firm with yourselves in this, and keep yourselves 
fully aware of the fact that the UNDOING process, which does NOT 
come from you, is nevertheless WITHIN you because God placed it 
there. 
YOUR part is merely to return your thinking to the point at 
which the error was made, and give it over to the Atonement in 
peace. 
Say to yourselves the following, as sincerely as you can, re¬ 
membering that the Holy Spirit will respond fully to your slightest 
invitation: T(270) C 97 

I must have decided wrongly because I am NOT at peace. 


I made the decision myself, but I can also decide otherwise. 



1-230 


240 


Chapter 5 - Healing and Wholeness 

I WILL to decide otherwise, because I WANT to be at peace. 


I do NOT feel guilty, because the Holy Spirit will undo ALL the 
consequences of my wrong decision IF I WILL LET HIM. 


I WILL to let Him by allowing Him to decide for God for me. 

(271) C 98 290 


290 March 22, 1966 


PROOF 


241 


COPY 


1-231 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 6 -Attack and Fear 

T 6 A. 
Introduction (Notes 599 6:163) 

T 6 A l. 
The relationship of anger to attack is obvious, but the inevi¬ 
table association of anger and FEAR is not always so clear. 
Anger 
ALWAYS involves PROJECTION OF SEPARATION, which must 
ultimately be accepted as entirely one's own responsibility. 
Anger 
cannot occur unless you believe that you have BEEN attacked; the 
attack was JUSTIFIED; and you are in no way responsible for it. 

Given these three wholly irrational premises, the equally irrational 
conclusion that a brother is worthy of attack rather than of love fol¬ 
lows. 
What can be expected from insane premises EXCEPT an in¬ 
sane conclusion? 

T 6 A 2. 
The way to undo an insane conclusion is always to consider 
the sanity of the premises on which it rests. 
You cannot BE attacked, 
attack HAS no justification, and you ARE responsible for what you 
believe. 
You have been asked to take me as your model for learning. 

And we have often said that an extreme example is a particularly 
helpful learning device. 
EVERYONE teaches, and teaches all the 
time. 
This is a responsibility which he assumes inevitably, the mo¬ 
ment he has accepted any premises at all. 
And NO ONE can organ¬ 
ize his life without ANY thought system. 
Once he has developed a 
thought system of any kind, he lives by it and TEACHES it. 


T 6 A 3. 
You have been chosen to teach the Atonement precisely BE¬ 
CAUSE you have been EXTREME examples of allegiance to your 
thought systems, and therefore have developed the capacity FOR 
allegiance. 
It has indeed been misplaced. 
Bill had become an out¬ 
standing example of allegiance to apathy, and you have become a 
startling example of fidelity to variability. 
But this IS a form of faith, 
which you yourselves had grown willing to redirect. 
You cannot 
doubt the STRENGTH of your devotion when you consider how 
faithfully you observed it. 
It was quite evident that you had AL- 


1-232 


242 


Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


READY developed the ability to follow a better model, if you could 
ACCEPT it. 
T(272) c 99 

T 6 B. 
The Message of the Crucifixion (Notes 601 6:165) 

T 6 B l. 
We have not dwelt upon the crucifixion, because of its fearful 
connotations. 
The only emphasis we laid upon it was that it was 
NOT a form of punishment. 
But we know that nothing can be really 
explained only in negative terms. 
There is a positive interpretation 
of the crucifixion which is wholly devoid of fear, and therefore 
wholly benign in what it teaches, if it is properly understood. 
It is 
nothing more than an extreme example. 
Its value, like the value of 
any teaching device, lies solely in the kind of learning it facilitates. 
It 
can be, and has been, misunderstood. 
But this is only because the 
fearful are apt to perceive fearfully. 


T 6 B 2.1 told you before that you can always call on me to share my 
decision and thus MAKE IT STRONGER. 
I also told you that the 
crucifixion was the last foolish journey that the Sonship need take, 
and that it should mean 291 RELEASE from fear to anyone who un¬ 
derstands it. 
While we emphasized the Resurrection only before, the 
purpose of the crucifixion and how it actually LED to the Resurrec¬ 
tion was not clarified at that time. 
Nevertheless, it has a definite con¬ 
tribution to make to your own lives, and if you will consider it 
WITHOUT fear, it will help you understand your own role as teach¬ 
ers. 


T 6 B 3. 
You have reacted for years AS IF you were being crucified. 

This is a marked tendency of the separated, who ALWAYS refuse to 
consider what they have done to THEMSELVES. 
Projection means 
anger, anger fosters assault, and assault promotes fear. 
The real 
meaning of the crucifixion lies in the APPARENT intensity of the 
assault of some of the Sons of God upon a brother. 
This, of course, is 
impossible, and must be fully understood AS an impossibility. 
In 


291 The Urtext manuscript has “means” here although the Notes and the ///X' both have “mean” which is 
better grammar. 



243 


1-233 



Volume I Text 


fact, unless it IS fully understood as ONLY that, I cannot serve as a 
real model for learning. 


T6B4. 
Assault can ultimately be made ONLY on the body. 
There is 
little doubt that one BODY can assault another, and can even de¬ 
stroy it. 
But if destruction ITSELF is impossible, then ANYTHING 
that is destructible cannot be real. 
Therefore, its destruction does 
NOT justify anger. 
To the extent T(273) C 100 to which you believe it 
DOES, you MUST be accepting false premises and TEACHING 
THEM TO OTHERS. 
The message which the crucifixion was in¬ 
tended to teach was that it is not necessary to perceive ANY form of 
assault in persecution because you cannot BE persecuted. 
If you re¬ 
spond with anger, you MUST be equating yourself with the destruc¬ 
tible, and are therefore regarding yourself insanely. 
I have made it 
perfectly clear that I am like you, and you are like me. 
But our fun¬ 
damental equality can be demonstrated only through joint decision. 


T 6 B 5. 
You are free to perceive yourselves as persecuted if you 
choose. 
292 But you might remember when you DO choose to react 
that way that I WAS persecuted as the world judges, and did NOT 
share this evaluation for myself. 
And because I did not share it, I did 
NOT strengthen it. 
I therefore offered a DIFFERENT interpretation 
of attack, and one which I DO want to share with you. 
If you will 
BELIEVE it, you will help me TEACH it. 


T 6 B 6. 
We have said before, "As you teach so shall you learn." If you 
react as if you are persecuted, you ARE teaching persecution. 
This is 
not a lesson which the Sons of God should WANT to teach if they 
are to realize their own salvation. 
Rather teach your own perfect 
immunity, which IS the Truth in you, and KNOW that it cannot be 
assailed. 
Do not protect it yourselves, or you have believed that it IS 
assailable. 
You are not asked to BE crucified, because that was part 
of my own teaching contribution. 
You are merely asked to follow 


!92 The Urtext manuscript and the Notes both have “chose” here, changed in later versions to “choose” 
which seems to fit much better. 



1-234 


244 



Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


my example in the face of much less extreme temptations to misper- 
ceive, and NOT to accept them falsely as justifications for anger. 

T6B7. 
There can BE no justification for the unjustifiable. 
Do not be¬ 
lieve there is, and do not TEACH that there is. 
Remember always 
that what you believe you WILL teach. 
Believe with me, and we will 
become equal as teachers. 
YOUR resurrection is your re-awakening. 

I am the model for rebirth, but rebirth itself is merely the dawning 
on your minds of what is already in them. 
T(274) C 101 God placed it 
there Himself, and so it is true forever. 
I believed in it, and therefore 
made it forever true for me. 
Help me to teach it to our brothers in 
the name of the Kingdom of God. 
But first believe that it is true for 
you, or you will teach amiss. 


T 6 B 8. 
My brothers slept 293 during the so-called "agony in the gar¬ 
den," but I could not be angry with them, because I had learned I 
could not BE abandoned. 
Peter swore he would never deny me, but 
he did so three times. 
It should be noted that he did offer to defend 
me with the sword, which I naturally refused, not being at all in 
need of bodily protection. 
I AM sorry when my brothers do not 
share my decision to hear (and be) only one voice, because it weak¬ 
ens them as teachers AND learners. 
But yet I know that they cannot 
really betray themselves or me, and that it is still on them that I 
MUST build my church. 
294 

T 6 B 9. 
There is no choice in this, because only you can BE the foun¬ 
dation of God's church. 
A church is where an altar is, and the pres¬ 
ence of the altar is what makes it a church. 
Any church which does 
not inspire love has a hidden altar which is not serving the purpose 


293 Luke 22:39-46 Coming out. 
He went to the Mount of Olives, as He was accustomed, and His 
disciples also followed Him. 
When He came to the place, He said to them, “Pray that you may not enter 
into temptation.” 

And He was withdrawn from them about a stone’s throw, and He knelt down and prayed, saying, 
“Father, if it is Your will, take this cup away from Me; nevertheless not My will, but Yours, be done.” 
Then an angel appeared to Him from heaven, strengthening Him. 
And being in agony, He prayed more 
earnestly. 
Then His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down to the ground. 
When He rose 
up from prayer, and had come to His disciples, He found them sleeping from sorrow. 
Then He said to 
them, “Why do you sleep? Rise and pray, lest you enter into temptation.” 

294 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 


245 


1-235 



Volume I Text 


for which God intended it. 
I must found His church on you because 
you, who accept me as a model are literally my disciples. 
Disciples 
are followers, but if the model they follow has chosen to SAVE 
THEM PAIN IN ALL RESPECTS, they are probably unwise NOT to 
follow him. 


T 6 B 10. 
1 elected, both for your sake AND mine, to demonstrate that 
the most outrageous assault, as judged by the ego, did not matter. 


As the world judges these things, but NOT as God knows them, I 
was betrayed, abandoned, beaten, torn, and finally killed. 
It was 
perfectly clear that this was only because of the projection of others 
onto me, because I had not harmed anyone and had healed many. 

We are still equal as learners, even though we need not have equal 
experiences. 
The Holy Spirit is glad when you can learn enough 
from MINE to be re-awakened by them. 
That was their only pur¬ 
pose, and that is the only way T(275) C 102 in which I can be perceived 
as the Way, the Truth, and the Light. 
295 

T 6 B ll. 
When you hear only one voice, you are never called on to 
sacrifice. 
On the contrary, by enabling YOURSELVES to hear the 
Holy Spirit in others, you can learn from their experiences and gain 
from them WITHOUT experiencing them. 
That is because the Holy 
Spirit IS one, and anyone who listens is inevitably led to demon¬ 
strate His way for ALL. 
You are not persecuted, nor was I. 
You are 
not asked to repeat my experience, because the Holy Spirit which 
we SHARE, makes this unnecessary. 
But to use my experiences con¬ 
structively for yourselves, you must still follow my example in how 
to perceive them. 


T 6 B 12. 
My brothers and yours are constantly engaged in justifying 
the unjustifiable. 
My one lesson, which I must teach as I learned, is 
that no perception which is out of accord with the judgment of the 
Holy Spirit CAN be justified. 
I undertook to show this was true in a 
very extreme case, merely because this would serve as a good teach- 

295 John 14:6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. 
No one comes to the Father 
except through Me. 
The Biblical quote certainly uses “life ” while the Shorthand Notes and later 
copying in ACIM has “light. 
” 


1-236 


246 



Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


ing aid to those whose temptations to give in to anger and assault 
would NOT be as extreme. 


T 6 B 13.1 will, with God Himself, that none of His Sons should suf¬ 
fer. 
Remember that the Holy Spirit is the communication link be¬ 
tween God the Father and His separated Sons. 
If you will listen to 
His voice, you will know that you cannot either hurt or BE hurt, but 
that many need your blessing to help them hear this for themselves. 

When you perceive only this need in them, and do not respond to 
any others, you will have learned 296 of me, and be as eager to share 
your learning as I am. 
The crucifixion CANNOT be shared, because 
it is the symbol of projection. 
But the Resurrection IS the symbol of 
sharing, because the re-awakening of every Son of God is necessary 
to enable the Sonship to know its wholeness. 
Only this IS knowl¬ 
edge. 


T 6 B 14. 
The message of the crucifixion is very simple and perfectly 
clear: "teach ONLY love, for that is what you ARE." If you interpret 
it in any other way, you are using it as a weapon for assault rather 
than as the call to peace for which it was intended. 
The Apostles of¬ 
ten misunderstood it, and always for the same reason that makes 
anyone misunderstand anything. 
Their T(276) C 103 own imperfect 
love made them vulnerable to projection, and out of their own fear 
they spoke of the wrath 297 of God as His RETALIATORY weapon. 

They also could not speak of the crucifixion entirely without anger, 
because their own sense of guilt had made them angry. 


T 6 B 15. 
There are two glaring examples of upside down thinking in 
the New Testament, whose whole Gospel is only the message of 


296 Matthew 11:29 “Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and 
you will find rest for your souls.” 

297 Ezekiel 7:19 They will throw their silver into the streets, 

And their gold will be like refuse; 

Their silver and their gold will not be able to deliver them 
In the day of the wrath of the LORD; 

They will not satisfy their souls, 

Nor fill their stomachs, 

Because it became their stumbling block of iniquity. 


John 3:36 “He who believes in the Son has everlasting life; and he who does not believe the Son shall 
not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.” 


247 


1-237 




Volume I Text 


love. 
These are not at all like the several slips into impatience which 
I made, because I had learned the Atonement prayer, which I also 
came to teach, too well to engage in upside down thinking myself. 
If 
the Apostles had not felt guilty, they never could have quoted ME 
as saying, "I come not to bring peace but a sword." 298 This is clearly 
the exact opposite of everything I taught. 


T 6 B 16. 
Nor could they have described my reactions to Judas Iscariot 
as they did, if they had really understood ME. 
They could not have 
believed that I could 299 have said, "Betrayest thou the Son of Man 
with a kiss?" 300 unless I BELIEVED IN BETRAYAL. 
The whole mes¬ 
sage of the crucifixion was simply that I did NOT. 
The "punish¬ 
ment" 301 which I am said to have called forth upon Judas was a simi¬ 
lar reversal. 
Judas was my brother and a Son of God, as much a part 
of the Sonship as myself. 
Was it likely that I would condemn him 
when I was ready to demonstrate that condemnation is impossible? 
T 6 B 17.1 am very grateful to the Apostles for their teaching, and 
fully aware of the extent of their devotion to me. 
But as you read 
their teachings, remember that I told them myself that there was 
much they would understand later, because they were NOT wholly 
ready to follow me at the time. 
302 1 emphasize this only because I do 
not want you to allow ANY fear to enter into the thought system 
toward which I am guiding you. 
I do NOT call for martyrs but for 
TEACHERS. 


T 6 B 18. 
Bill is an outstanding example of this confusion, and has lit¬ 
erally believed for years that teaching IS martyrdom. 
This is because 
he thought, and still thinks at times, that teaching leads to crucifix- 


2,8 Matthew 10:34 “Do not think that I came to bring peace on earth. 
I did not come to bring peace but 
a sword.” 

299 The manuscript has “not” typed between the lines which is also present in the Notes. 
However, this 
very much appears to be an error since it really makes no sense to say “ They could not have believed 
that I could not have said, ‘Betrayest though the Son of Man with a kiss? ’ unless I BELIEVED IN 
BETRAYAL. 
” It has to be either “I could not have said ...” or “They could not believe I could have 
said... 
” but it can’t be both. 


300 Luke 22:48 But Jesus said to him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?” 

301 Matthew 26:24 “The Son of Man indeed goes just as it is written of Him, but woe to that man by 
whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would have been good for that man if he had not been bom.” 
j02 John 16:12 “I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now.” 


1-238 


248 




Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


ion rather than to re-awakening. 
The upside down nature of this as¬ 
sociation is so obvious that T(277) C 104 he could only have made it 
BECAUSE he felt guilty. 
No-one is "punished" for sins, and the Sons 
of God are not sinners. 
ANY concept of "punishment" involves the 
projection of blame, and REINFORCES the idea that blame is justi¬ 
fied. 
The behavior that results is a LESSON IN BLAME, just as all 
behavior teaches the beliefs that motivate it. 


T 6 B 19. 
The crucifixion was a complex of behaviors arising out of 
clearly opposed thought systems. 
As such, it is the perfect symbol of 
conflict between the ego and the Son of God. 
It was as much in¬ 
trapersonal as interpersonal then, just as it is now, and it is still just 
as real. 
But BECAUSE it is just as real now, its lesson, too, has equal 
reality WHEN IT IS LEARNED. 
I do not need gratitude any more 
than I needed protection. 
But YOU need to develop your weakened 
ability to BE grateful, or you cannot appreciate God. 
HE does not 
need your appreciation, but you DO. 


T 6 B 20. 
You cannot love what you do not appreciate, and FEAR 
MAKES APPRECIATION IMPOSSIBLE. 
Whenever you are afraid of 
what you are, you do not appreciate it, and will therefore reject it. 


As a result, you will TEACH REJECTION. 
The power of the Sons of 
God is operating all the time, because they were created as creators. 

Their influence on EACH OTHER is without limit, and MUST be 
used for their joint salvation. 
Each one MUST learn to teach that all 
forms of rejection are utterly meaningless. 


T 6 B 21. 
The separation IS the notion of rejection. 
As long as you 
teach this, YOU still believe it. 
This is NOT as God thinks, and you 
must think as He thinks if you are to know Him again. 


T 6 C. 
The Uses of Projection (Notes 618 6:182) 

T 6 C 1 . 
Any split in will MUST involve a rejection of part of it, and 
this IS the belief in separation. 
The wholeness of God, which IS His 
peace, cannot be appreciated EXCEPT by a whole mind, which rec¬ 
ognizes the wholeness of God's creation and BY this recognition 
knows its Creator. 



249 


1-239 


Volume I Text 


T 6 C 2. 
Exclusion and separation are synonymous. 
So are separation 
and dissociation. 
We have said before that the separation was and IS 
dissociation, and also that once it had occurred, projection became 
its main defense, or the device which KEEPS IT GOING. 
The reason, 
however, may not be T(278) c 105 as clear to you as you think. 
What 
you project you disown, and therefore DO NOT BELIEVE IS 
YOURS . 
You are therefore EXCLUDING yourself from it, by the 
very statement you are making that you are DIFFERENT from 
someone else. 
Since you have also judged AGAINST what you pro¬ 
ject, you attack it because you have already attacked it BY rejecting 
it. 
By doing this UNCONSCIOUSLY, you try to keep the fact that 
you must have attacked yourself FIRST out of awareness, and thus 
imagine that you have made yourself safe. 


T 6 c 3. 
Projection will ALWAYS hurt you. 
It reinforces your belief in 
your own split mind, and its ONLY purpose is to KEEP THE SEPA¬ 
RATION GOING. 
It is solely a device of the ego to make you feel 
DIFFERENT from your brothers and separated FROM them. 
The 
ego justifies this on the wholly spurious grounds that it makes you 
seem better than they are, thus obscuring equality WITH them still 
further. 


T 6 c 4. 
Projection and attack are inevitably related, because projec¬ 
tion is ALWAYS a means of JUSTIFYING attack. 
Anger without 
projection is impossible. 
The ego uses projection ONLY to distort 
your perception of both yourself AND your brothers. 
It begins by 
excluding something you think exists in you which you do not 
want, and leads directly to your excluding yourself from your 
brothers. 


T 6 C 5. 
But we know that there is another use of projection. 
Every 
ability of the ego has a better counterpart, because its abilities are 
directed by the mind, which has a better voice. 
The Holy Spirit, as 
well as the ego, utilizes projection but since their goals are opposed, 
so is the result. 
The Holy Spirit begins by perceiving YOU as perfect. 

KNOWING this perfection is shared, it RECOGNIZES it in others, 
thus strengthening it in both. 
Instead of anger, this arouses love 


1-240 


250 




Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


FOR both because IT ESTABLISHES INCLUSION. 
Perceiving equal¬ 
ity, it perceives equal needs. 
This invites Atonement automatically, 
because Atonement IS the one need which is universal. 
T(279) c 106 

T 6 c 6. 
To perceive YOURSELF in this way is the ONLY way in 
which you can find happiness in this world. 
This is because it is the 
acknowledgement that you are NOT in this world, and the world IS 
unhappy. 
How else can you find joy in a joyless place EXCEPT by 
realizing that YOU ARE NOT THERE? You cannot be ANYWHERE 
that God did not put you, and God created you as part of HIM. 
That 
is both WHERE you are and WHAT you are. 
This is COMPLETELY 
unalterable. 
It is total inclusion. 
You cannot change this now or ever. 

It is forever true. 
It is NOT a belief, but a fact. 


T 6 c 7. 
Anything that God creates is as true as He is. 
Its truth lies 
only in its perfect inclusion in Him Who alone IS perfect. 
To deny 
this in any way is to deny yourself AND Him, because it is impossi¬ 
ble to accept one without the other. 
The perfect equality of the Holy 
Spirit's perception is the counterpart of the perfect equality of God's 
knowing. 
The ego's perception has no counterpart in God, but the 
Holy Spirit remains the bridge between perception and knowledge. 

By enabling you to use perception in a way that PARALLELS 
knowledge, you will ultimately meet it and KNOW it. 


T 6 c 8. 
The ego prefers to believe that parallel lines do not meet, and 
conceives of their meeting as impossible. 
But you might remember 
that the human eye perceives them as if they DO meet in the dis¬ 
tance, which is the same as IN THE FUTURE, if time and space are 
one dimension. 
The later mathematics support the interpretation of 
ultimate convergence of the parallel theoretically. 
EVERYTHING 
meets in God, because everything was created BY Him and IN 
Him. 
303 God created His Sons by extending His Thought and retain¬ 
ing the extensions of His Thought in His Mind. 
ALL His Thoughts 


303 Genesis 1:1 In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. 


John 1:3 All things were made through Him, and without Him nothing was made that was made. 

Ephesians 3:9 and to make all men see what is the dispensation of the mystery which for ages hath 
been hid in God who created all things; 


251 


1-241 



Volume I Text 


are thus perfectly united within themselves and with each other be¬ 
cause they, were created neither partially nor in part. 


T 6 c 9. 
The Holy Spirit enables you to PERCEIVE THIS WHOLE¬ 
NESS NOW. 
You can no more pray for yourselves alone than you 
can find joy for yourself T(280) C 107 alone. 
Prayer is a re-statement of 
INCLUSION, directed by the Holy Spirit under the laws of God. 


God created you to create. 
You cannot EXTEND His Kingdom until 
you KNOW of its wholeness. 
But thoughts begin in the mind OF 
THE THINKER, from which they extend outward. 
This is as true of 
God's thinking as it is of yours. 
Because your minds are split, you 
can also perceive as well as think, but perception cannot escape 
from the basic laws of mind. 
You perceive FROM your mind, and 
extend your perceptions outward. 


T 6 C 10. 
Although perception of any kind is unnecessary, YOU made 
it and the Holy Spirit can therefore use it well. 
He can INSPIRE per¬ 
ception and lead it toward God by making it PARALLEL to God's 
way of thinking, and thus guaranteeing their ultimate meeting. 
This 
convergence SEEMS to be far in the future ONLY because your 
mind is NOT in perfect alignment with the idea, and therefore 
DOES NOT WANT IT NOW. 
The Holy Spirit USES time, but does 
NOT believe in it. 
Coming from God, He uses EVERYTHING for 
good, 304 but does not BELIEVE in what is not true. 


T 6 C 11. 
Since the Holy Spirit IS in your minds, then your minds 
MUST be able to believe ONLY what is true. 
The Holy Spirit can 
speak only for this, because he speaks for God. 
He tells you to re¬ 
turn your whole mind to God, BECAUSE IT HAS NEVER LEFT 
HIM. 
If it has never left Him, you need only perceive it AS IT IS to 
BE returned. 
The full awareness of the Atonement, then, is the rec¬ 
ognition that the separation NEVER OCCURRED. 
The ego CAN- 


1 Romans 8:28 And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those 
who are the called according to His purpose. 



1-242 


252 




Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


NOT prevail 305 against this, because it is an explicit statement that 
the EGO never occurred. 


T 6 c 12. 
The ego can accept the idea that RETURN is necessary, be¬ 
cause it can so easily make the idea seem so difficult. 
But the Holy 
Spirit tells you that even RETURN is unnecessary, because what 
never happened CANNOT involve ANY problem. 
But it does NOT 
follow that YOU cannot make the idea of return both necessary 
AND difficult. 
God made nothing either necessary OR difficult. 
But 
YOU have perceived both AS IF they were part of His perfect crea¬ 
tions. 
Yet it is surely clear that the perfect NEED nothing, and 
CANNOT T(28l) C 108 experience perfection as a difficult accom¬ 
plishment because that is what they ARE. 


T 6 c 13. 
This is the way in which you MUST perceive God's Crea¬ 
tions, bringing all of your perceptions into the one parallel line 
which the Holy Spirit sees. 
This line is the direct line of communica¬ 
tion with God, and lets YOUR mind converge with HIS. 
There is NO 
CONFLICT ANYWHERE in this perception, because it means that 
ALL perception is guided by the Holy Spirit, whose mind is fixed on 
God. 
ONLY the Holy Spirit can resolve conflict, because ONLY the 
Holy Spirit is conflict-free. 
He perceives ONLY what is true in 
YOUR mind, and extends outward to ONLY what is true in other 
minds. 


T 6 c 14. 
The difference between the ego's use of projection and pro¬ 
jection as the Holy Spirit uses it is very simple. 
The ego projects to 
EXCLUDE and therefore to deceive. 
The Holy Spirit projects by 
RECOGNIZING HIMSELF in EVERY mind, and thus perceives 
them as ONE. 
Nothing conflicts in this perception, because what the 
Holy Spirit perceives IS the same. 
Wherever He looks He sees Him¬ 
self, and because He is UNITED, He offers the whole Kingdom al¬ 
ways. 
This is the one message which God gave TO Him, and for 


305 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 


253 


1-243 



Volume I Text 


which He must speak because that is what He IS. 
The peace of God 
lies in that message, and so the peace of God lies in YOU. 


T 6 C 15. 
The great peace of the Kingdom shines in your mind for¬ 
ever, but it must shine OUTWARD to make YOU aware of it. 
The 
Holy Spirit was given you with perfect impartiality, and only by 
perceiving Him impartially can you perceive Him at all. 
The ego is 
legion, 306 but the Holy Spirit is one. 
No darkness abides ANY¬ 
WHERE in the Kingdom, so your part is only to allow no darkness 
to abide in your OWN mind. 
This alignment with Light is unlim¬ 
ited, because it is in alignment with the Light of the world. 
307 Each of 
us IS the Light of the world, and by joining our minds IN this Light, 
we proclaim the Kingdom of God together and AS ONE. 
T(282) c 
109 308 

T 6 D, The Relinquishment of Attack (Notes 625 6:193) 

T 6 D 1 . 
We have used many words as synonymous which are not 
ordinarily regarded as the same. 
We began with having and being, 
and recently have used others. 
Hearing and being is an example, to 
which we can also add teaching and being, learning and being, and, 
above all, PROJECTING and being. 
This is because, as we have said 
before, every idea begins in the mind of the thinker and extends 
outward. 
Therefore, what extends FROM the mind IS STILL IN IT, 
and FROM what it extends IT KNOWS ITSELF. 
This is its natural 
talent. 


T 6 D 2. 
The word "knows" is correct here, even though the ego does 
NOT know, and is not concerned with BEING at all. 
The Holy Spirit 
still holds knowledge safe through its impartial perception. 
By at¬ 
tacking nothing, it presents no barrier at all to the communication of 
God. 
Therefore, being is never threatened. 
Your Godlike mind can 
never be defiled. 
The ego never was and never will be part of it. 


306 Mark 5:9 Then He asked him, “What is your name?” And he answered, saying, “My name is 
Legion; for we are many.” 

307 Matthew 5:14 “You are the light of the world. 
A city that is set on a hill cannot be hidden." 

308 March 29, ’66. 



1-244 


254 



Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


T 6 D 3. 
But through the ego you CAN hear and learn and teach and 
project WHAT IS NOT TRUE. 
From this, which YOU have made, 
you have taught yourselves to believe you ARE NOT WHAT YOU 
ARE. 
You CANNOT teach what you have not learned. 
And what 
you teach you strengthen in yourselves BECAUSE you are sharing 
it. 
Every lesson which you teach YOU are learning. 


T 6 D 4. 
That is why you must teach only ONE lesson. 
If you are to be 
conflict free yourselves, you must learn ONLY from the Holy Spirit, 
and teach ONLY by Him. 
You ARE only love, but when you denied 
this you made what you ARE something you must LEARN. 
We said 
before that the message of the Crucifixion was teach ONLY love, for 
that is what you ARE. 
This is the ONE lesson which is perfectly uni¬ 
fied, because it is the only lesson which IS one. 
And only BY teach¬ 
ing it can YOU learn it. 
T(283) C 110 

T 6 D 5. 
"As you teach so will you learn." If that is true, and it is true 
indeed, you must never forget that what you teach is teaching YOU. 

What you project you BELIEVE. 
The only REAL safety lies in pro¬ 
jecting ONLY the Holy Spirit, because as you see His gentleness in 
others your own mind perceives ITSELF as totally harmless. 
Once it 
can accept this fully, it does NOT see the need to PROTECT ITSELF. 

The protection of God then dawns upon it, assuring it that it is per¬ 
fectly safe forever. 


T 6 D 6. 
The perfectly safe ARE wholly benign. 
They bless because 
they know they ARE blessed. 
Without anxiety, the mind is wholly 
kind, and because it PROJECTS beneficence, it IS beneficent. 
Safety 
is the COMPLETE RELINQUISHMENT OF ATTACK. 
No compro¬ 
mise is possible in this. 
Teach attack in any form, and YOU HAVE 
LEARNED IT AND IT WILL HURT YOU. 
But your learning is not 
immortal, and you can unlearn it BY NOT TEACHING IT. 
Since you 
cannot NOT teach, your salvation lies in teaching exactly the oppo¬ 
site of EVERYTHING THE EGO BELIEVES. 
This is how YOU will 


255 


1-245 


Volume I Text 


learn the truth that will make you free, 309 and keep you so as others 
learn it of YOU. 


T 6 D 7. 
The only way to HAVE peace is to TEACH peace. 
By learning 
it through projection, it becomes a part of you that you KNOW, be¬ 
cause you cannot teach what you have dissociated. 
Only thus can 
you win back the knowledge you threw away. 
An idea which you 
SHARE you MUST HAVE. 
It awakens in you through the CON¬ 
VICTION of teaching. 
Remember that if teaching is being and learn¬ 
ing is being, then teaching is learning. 
EVERYTHING you teach 
YOU are learning. 
Teach only love, and learn that love is yours and 
YOU are love. 
T(284) c 111 310 

T 6 E. 
The Only Answer (Notes 634 6:198) 

T 6 E l. 
Remember that the Holy Spirit is the ANSWER, not the ques¬ 
tion. 
The ego always speaks first, because it is capricious and does 
NOT mean its maker well. 
This is because it believes, and correctly, 
that its maker may withdraw his support from it at any moment. 
If 
it meant you well, it would be glad, as the Holy Spirit will be glad 
when He has brought you home and you no longer need His guid¬ 
ance. 
The ego does NOT regard itself as part of you. 
Herein lies its 
primary perceptual error, the foundation of its whole thought sys¬ 
tem. 


T 6 E 2. 
When God created you. 
He made you part of Him. 
That is 
why attack WITHIN the Kingdom is impossible. 
But YOU made the 
ego without love, and so it does not love YOU. 
You could not re¬ 
main WITHIN the Kingdom without love, and since the Kingdom IS 
love, you believe you are WITHOUT it. 
This enables the ego to re¬ 
gard itself as SEPARATE AND OUTSIDE ITS MAKER, thus speak¬ 
ing for the part of your mind that believes YOU are separate and 
outside the Mind of God. 


T 6 E 3. 
The ego, then, raised the first question that was ever asked, 
but it can never answer it. 
That question, which was "What are 


309 John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 

310 March 30, 1966 


1-246 


256 



Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


you?" was the beginning of doubt. 
The ego has never answered 
ANY questions since, though it has raised a great many. 
The most 
inventive activities of the ego have never done more than OBSCURE 
THE QUESTION, because you HAVE the answer, and THE EGO IS 
AFRAID OF YOU. 
You cannot really understand conflict until YOU 
fully understand one basic fact that the ego does not know. 
The 
Holy Spirit does not speak first, but He ALWAYS answers. 
EVERY¬ 
ONE has called upon Him for help at one time or another, and in 
one way or another, AND HAS BEEN ANSWERED. 
Since the Holy 
Spirit answers truly. 
He answers FOR ALL TIME, and that means 
that EVERYONE HAS THE ANSWER NOW. 
T(285) C 112 
T 6 E 4. 
The ego cannot hear the Holy Spirit, but it DOES feel that 
part of the same mind that made it is AGAINST it. 
It interprets this 
wholly as a justification for ATTACKING its maker. 
The ego be¬ 
lieves that the best defense is attack, and WANTS YOU TO BE¬ 
LIEVE THIS. 
Unless you DO believe it, you will not side with it. 


And the ego feels badly in need of allies, though not of brothers. 


T 6 E 5. 
Perceiving something alien to itself in your MIND, the ego 
turns to the body, NOT the mind as its ally BECAUSE the body is 
not part of you. 
This makes the body the ego's friend. 
But it is an 
alliance frankly based on separation. 
If you side with this alliance, 
you WILL be afraid, because you are siding with an alliance OF fear. 

The ego and the body conspire AGAINST your minds, and because 
they realize that their "enemy" CAN end them both merely by 
knowing they are not part of him, they join in the attack together. 

This is perhaps the strangest perception of all, if you consider what 
it really involves. 
The ego, which is not real, attempts to persuade 
the mind, which IS real, that it IS its own learning device, and that 
the learning device is more real than IT is. 
No-one in his right mind 
could POSSIBLY believe this, and no-one in his right mind DOES 
believe it. 


T 6 E 6. 
Hear, then, the one answer of the Holy Spirit to ALL the 
questions which the ego raises. 
You are a Child of God, a priceless 
part of His Kingdom, which He created as part of Him. 
Nothing else 


257 


1-247 



Volume I Text 


exists, and ONLY this is real. 
You have chosen a sleep in which you 
have had bad dreams, but the sleep is not real, and God calls you to 
awake. 
There will be nothing left of your dream when you hear 
Him, because you WILL be awake. 
Your dreams have contained 
many of the ego's symbols, and they have confused you. 
But that 
was only because you were asleep and DID NOT KNOW. 
T(286) C 113 
T 6 E 7. 
When you awake, you will see the Truth around you and in 
you, and you will no longer believe in dreams, because they will 
have no reality for you. 
But the Kingdom and all that you have cre¬ 
ated there will have great reality for you, because they are beautiful 
and true. 
In the Kingdom, where you are and what you are is per¬ 
fectly certain. 
There is no doubt there, because the first question was 
never asked. 
Having finally been wholly answered, IT HAS NEVER 
BEEN. 
BEING alone lives in the Kingdom, where everything lives in 
God without question. 
The time that was spent on questioning in 

the dream has given way to the Creation and to its Eternity. 
T(287) C 
114 

T 6 E 8. 
YOU 311 are as certain as God, because you are as true as He is. 

But what was once quite certain in your minds has become only the 
ABILITY for certainty. 
The introduction of abilities into being was 
the beginning of UNcertainty, because abilities are POTENTIALS, 
not accomplishments. 
Your abilities are totally useless in the pres¬ 
ence of God's accomplishments and also of yours. 
Accomplishments 
are RESULTS which HAVE BEEN achieved. 
When they are perfect, 
abilities are meaningless. 


T 6 E 9. 
It is curious that the perfect must now be perfected. 
In fact, it 
is impossible. 
But you must remember that when you put your¬ 
selves in an impossible situation, you believed that the impossible 
WAS possible. 


T 6 E 10. 
Abilities must be DEVELOPED, or you cannot use them. 


This is not true of anything that God created, but it is the kindest 
solution possible to what YOU have made. 
In an impossible situa- 

311 April 1, 1966 


1-248 


258 



Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


tion, you can develop your abilities to the point where they CAN 
GET YOU OUT OF IT. 
You have a guide to how to develop them, 
but you have no commander EXCEPT YOURSELF. 
This leaves YOU 
in charge of the Kingdom, with both a guide to FIND it and a 
MEANS to keep it. 
You have a model to follow who will strengthen 
YOUR command, and never detract from it in any way. 
You there¬ 
fore retain the central place in your perceived enslavement, a fact 
which ITSELF demonstrates that you are NOT enslaved. 


T 6 E 11, You are in an impossible situation only because you thought 
it was possible to be in one. 
You WOULD be in an impossible situa¬ 
tion if God showed you your perfection, and PROVED to you that 
you were wrong. 
This would demonstrate that the perfect were in¬ 
adequate to bring THEMSELVES to the awareness of their perfec¬ 
tion, and thus side with the belief that those who have everything 
need help, and are therefore helpless. 
T(288) c 115 
T 6 E 12. 
This is the kind of reasoning that the ego engages in, but 
God, who KNOWS that His creations are perfect does NOT insult 
them. 
This would be as impossible as the ego's notion that it has in¬ 
sulted Him. 
That is why the Holy Spirit NEVER commands. 
To 
command is to assume INequality, which the Holy Spirit demon¬ 
strates does not exist. 
Fidelity to premises is a law of the mind, and 
everything God created is faithful to His laws. 
But fidelity to other 
laws is also possible, not because the laws are true, but because 
YOU MADE THEM. 


T 6 E 13. 
What would be gained if God proved to you that you have 
thought insanely? Can God lose His own certainty? We have fre¬ 
quently stated that what you teach you ARE. 
Would you have God 
teach you that you have sinned? If He confronted the self you have 
made with the Truth He created FOR you, what could you be but 
afraid? You would doubt your sanity, which is the one thing in 
which you can FIND the sanity He gave you. 
God does not teach. 
To 
teach is to imply a lack which God KNOWS is not there. 
God is not 
conflicted. 
Teaching aims at change, but God created ONLY the 
changeless. 



259 


1-249 


Volume I Text 


T 6 E 14. 
The separation was not a loss of perfection, but a failure in 
COMMUNICATION. 
A harsh and strident form of communication 
arose as the ego's voice. 
It could not shatter the peace of God, but it 
COULD shatter YOURS. 
God did not blot it out, because to eradi¬ 
cate it would be to attack it. 
Being questioned. 
He did not question. 

He merely gave the Answer. 


T 6 E 15. 
God's answer IS your teacher. 


T 6 F. 
"To Have, Give All to All" (Notes 644 6:208) 

T 6 F1 . 
Like any good teacher. 
He DOES know more than you know 
NOW, but He teaches only to make you equals. 
This is because you 
had ALREADY taught wrong, having believed what was not true. 

YOU DID NOT BELIEVE IN YOUR OWN PERFECTION. 
Could 
God teach you that you had made a split mind when He knows 
your mind only as whole? T(289) C 116 

T 6 F 2. 
What God DOES know is that His communication channels 
are not open to Him, so that He cannot impart His joy and know 
that His Children are wholly joyous. 
This is an ongoing process, not 
in time, but in eternity. 
God's extending outward, though not His 
completeness, was blocked when the Sonship does not communicate 
with Him as one. 
So He thought, "My Children sleep, and must be 
awakened." 

T 6 F 3. 
How can you wake children better and more kindly than 
with a gentle Voice that will not frighten them, but will merely re¬ 
mind them that the night is over and the Light has come? You do 
not inform them that the nightmares which frightened them so 
badly were not real, because children BELIEVE in magic. 
You 
merely reassure them that they are safe NOW. 
Then you train them 
to RECOGNIZE THE DIFFERENCE between sleeping and waking, 
so that THEY will understand they need not be afraid of dreams. 

Then when bad dreams come, they will call on the Light THEM¬ 
SELVES to dispel them. 


T 6 F 4. 
A wise teacher teaches through approach, NOT avoidance. 


He does not emphasize what you must avoid to escape from harm 


1-250 


260 


Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


as much as what you need to learn to have joy. 
This is true even of 
the world's teachers. 
Consider the confusion that a child would ex¬ 
perience if he were told, "Do not do THIS because it might hurt you 
and make you unsafe, but if you do THAT you will escape from 
harm and be safe, and then you will not be afraid." All of this could 
be included in only three words: "Do only that." That simple state¬ 
ment is perfectly clear, easily understood, and very easily remem¬ 
bered. 
T(290) C 117 

T 6 F 5. 
The Holy Spirit NEVER itemizes errors, because He does not 
frighten children, and those who lack wisdom ARE children. 
But He 
ALWAYS answers their call, and His dependability makes THEM 
more certain. 
Children DO confuse fantasy and reality, and they 
ARE frightened because they do not know the difference. 


T 6 F 6. 
The Holy Spirit makes NO distinction among dreams. 
He 
merely shines them away. 
His light is ALWAYS the call to awake, 
WHATEVER you may have been dreaming. 
Nothing lasting lies in 
dreams, and the Holy Spirit, shining with the light from God Him¬ 
self, speaks only for what lasts forever. 


T 6 F 7. 
When your body and your ego and your dreams are gone, 
you will know that YOU will last forever. 
Many think that this is 
accomplished through death, but NOTHING is accomplished 
through death because death is nothing. 
EVERYTHING is accom¬ 
plished through life, and life is of the mind and in the Mind. 
The 
body neither lives nor dies, because it cannot contain you who ARE 
life. 
If we share the same mind, YOU CAN OVERCOME DEATH 
BECAUSE I DID. 
Death is an attempt to resolve conflict by not will¬ 
ing at all. 
Like any other impossible solution which the ego at¬ 
tempts, IT WILL NOT WORK. 


T 6 F 8. 
God did not make the body, because it is destructible, and 
therefore not of the Kingdom. 
The body is the symbol of the WHAT 
YOU THINK YOU ARE. 
It is clearly a separation device, and there¬ 
fore does not exist. 
The Holy Spirit, as always, takes what you have 
made and translates it into a learning device FOR you. 
Again, as al- 


261 


1-251 


Volume I Text 


ways, it re-interprets what the ego uses as an argument FOR separa¬ 
tion into an argument AGAINST it. 
T(291) -118 
T 6 F 9. 
If the mind can heal the body, but the body cannot heal the 
mind, then the mind MUST BE STRONGER. 
Every miracle demon¬ 
strates this. 
We have said that the Holy Spirit is the MOTIVATION 
for miracles. 
This is because He ALWAYS tells you that ONLY the 
mind is real, because only the mind CAN BE SHARED. 
The body IS 
separate, and therefore CANNOT be part of you. 
To be of one 
mind 312 is meaningful, but to be of one body is meaningless. 
By the 
laws of mind, then, the body IS meaningless. 


T 6 F10. 
To the Holy Spirit THERE IS NO ORDER OF DIFFICULTY 
IN MIRACLES. 
This is FAMILIAR enough to you by now, but it has 
not yet become believable. 
Therefore, you do not understand it and 
cannot USE it. 
We have too much to accomplish on behalf of the 
Kingdom to let this crucial concept slip away. 
It is a real foundation 
stone of the thought system I teach and want YOU to teach. 
You 
cannot perform miracles without believing it, because it is a belief in 
perfect equality. 


T 6 F ll. 
Only one equal gift CAN be offered to the equal Sons of 
God, and that is FULL APPRECIATION. 
Nothing more and nothing 
less. 
Without a range, order of difficulty IS meaningless, and there 
must BE no range in what you offer to each other. 
The Holy Spirit, 
which leads to God, translates communication into being, just as He 
ultimately translates perception into knowledge. 


T 6 F12. 
You DO NOT LOSE WHAT YOU COMMUNICATE. 
The 
ego uses the body for attack, for pleasure, and for pride. 
The insan¬ 
ity of this perception makes it a fearful one. 
The Holy Spirit sees it 
only as a means of COMMUNICATION. 
And because communicat¬ 
ing IS sharing, it becomes communion. 
You might argue that fear as 
well as love can be communicated, and therefore can be shared. 
But 
this is not so real as it sounds. 
Those who communicate fear are 


31 Romans 12:16 Be of the same mind toward one another. 
Do not set your mind on high things, but 
associate with the humble. 
Do not be wise in your own opinion. 



1-252 


262 



Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


promoting attack, and attack always BREAKS communication, and 
therefore makes communion impossible. 
T(292) -119 
T 6 F13. 
Egos DO join together in temporary allegiance, but always 
for WHAT EACH ONE CAN GET SEPARATELY. 
The Holy Spirit 
communicates only WHAT EACH ONE CAN GIVE TO ALL. 
He 
never takes ANYTHING back, because He wants YOU to keep it. 

Therefore, His teaching begins with the lesson: To HAVE, GIVE all 
TO all. 


T 6 F 14. 
This is a very preliminary step, and THE ONLY ONE YOU 
MUST TAKE YOURSELF. 
It is not even necessary that you COM¬ 
PLETE the step yourself, but it IS necessary that you turn in that di¬ 
rection. 
Having willed to go that way, you place YOURSELF in 
charge of the journey, where you and ONLY you must remain. 


T 6 F15. 
This step APPEARS to exacerbate conflict rather than resolve 
it, because it is the BEGINNING step in reversing your perception 
and turning it right side up. 
This conflicts with the upside down 
perception which you have not yet abandoned, or the change in di¬ 
rection would not have been necessary. 
Some people remain at this 
step for a very long time, experiencing VERY acute conflict. 
Many 
try to accept the CONFLICT, rather than to take the next step to¬ 
ward its resolution. 
But having taken the first step, they WILL be 
helped. 
Having willed what they CANNOT complete alone, THEY 
ARE NO LONGER ALONE. 


T 6 F16. 
You, Helen, had taken this step, and because you believed in 
it, you taught it to Bill, who still believed in the solution of sleep. 


You were not consistent in teaching it, but you did so often enough 
to enable him to learn it. 
Once HE learned it, he could teach YOU 
how to become more consistently awake, and thus begin to waken 
HIMSELF. 
This placed him, too, in command of the journey. 
His 
recognition of the direction it must take was perfectly stated when 
he INSISTED ON COLLABORATION. 



263 


1-253 


Volume I Text 


T 6 F17. 
You, H., had taken a giant step INTO conflict, but B. 
turned 
you both forwards TOWARD THE WAY OUT. 
The more he teaches 
this, the more he will learn it. 
T(293) C 120 313 

T 6 G. 
"To Have Peace, Teach Peace to Learn It" (Notes 654 
6:218) 

T 6 G l. 
All the separated ones have a basic fear of retaliation and 
abandonment. 
This is because they BELIEVE in attack and rejection, 
so this is what they perceive and teach and LEARN. 
These insane 
concepts are clearly the result of their own dissociation and projec¬ 
tion. 
What you teach you are, but it is quite apparent that you can 
teach wrongly, and therefore TEACH YOURSELVES WRONG. 

Many thought that I was attacking them, even though it is quite ap¬ 
parent that I was NOT. 
An insane learner learns strange lessons. 


T 6 G 2. 
What you must understand is that, when you do not SHARE 
a thought system, you ARE weakening it. 
Those who BELIEVE in it 
therefore perceive this as an ATTACK ON THEM. 
This is because 
everyone identifies himself WITH his thought system, and EVERY 
thought system centers on WHAT YOU BELIEVE YOU ARE. 
If the 
center of the thought system is TRUE, only truth extends outward 
from it. 
But if a lie is at its center, only DECEPTION proceeds from 
it. 


T 6 G 3. 
All good teachers realize that only fundamental change will 
last. 
But they do NOT begin at that level. 
Strengthening MOTIVA¬ 
TION for change is their first and foremost goal. 
It is also their last 
and final one. 
Increasing motivation for change IN THE LEARNER 
is all that a teacher NEED do to GUARANTEE change. 
This is be¬ 
cause a change in motivation IS a change of mind, and this will IN¬ 
EVITABLY produce fundamental change BECAUSE the mind IS 
fundamental. 
T(294) -121 

T 6 G 4. 
The first step in the reversal or undoing process, then, is the 
UNDOING of the getting concept. 
Accordingly, the Holy Spirit's 
first lesson was: To HAVE, GIVE all TO all. 
We said that this is apt 


APRIL 3, ‘66 


1-254 


264 



Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


to INCREASE conflict temporarily, and we can clarify this still fur¬ 
ther now. 
At this point, the equality of having and being is not yet 
perceived. 
Until it IS, having still appears to be the OPPOSITE of 
being. 
Therefore, the first lesson SEEMS to contain a contradiction 
because it is BEING LEARNED BY A CONFLICTED MIND. 
This 
MEANS conflicting motivation, and so the lesson CANNOT be 
learned consistently as yet. 


T 6 G 5. 
Further, the mind of the learner projects its own split, and 
therefore does NOT perceive consistent minds in others, making 
him suspicious of THEIR motivations. 
This is the real reason why in 
many respects the first lesson is the hardest to learn. 
Still strongly 
aware of the ego in himself, and responding primarily TO the ego in 
others, he is being taught to react to BOTH as if what he DOES be¬ 
lieve IS NOT TRUE. 


T 6 G 6. 
Upside down as always, the ego perceives the first lesson as 
insane. 
In fact, this is its only alternative here, because the other one, 
which would be much LESS acceptable, would obviously be that IT 
is insane. 
The ego's judgment, then, is predetermined by what it IS, 
though not more so than is any other product of thought. 
The fun¬ 
damental change will still occur with the change of mind IN THE 
THINKER. 
T(295) -122 

T 6 G 7. 
Meanwhile, the increasing clarity of the Holy Spirit's voice 
makes it impossible for the learner NOT TO LISTEN. 
For a time, 
then, he IS receiving conflicting messages AND ACCEPTING 
BOTH. 
This is the classic "double bind" in communication, which 
you wrote about yourselves quite recently, and with good examples 
too. 
It is interesting that Helen claimed at the time that she had 
never heard of it and did not understand it. 
You might remember 
our brother's insistence on its inclusion. 
Helen thought he had be¬ 
come (quite) irrational on this point, but it was quite strongly rein¬ 
forced in HIS mind, and so he wanted to teach it in his text. 
This, of 
course, was a very good way for YOU to learn it. 


T 6 G 8. 
The way out of conflict between two opposing thought sys¬ 
tems is clearly TO CHOOSE ONE AND RELINQUISH THE 


265 


1-255 


Volume I Text 


OTHER. 
If you identify WITH your thought system, and you cannot 
escape this, and if you accept two thought systems which are in 
COMPLETE Disagreement, peace of mind IS impossible. 
If you 
TEACH both, which you will surely do as long as you ACCEPT 
both, you are teaching conflict and LEARNING it. 
But you DO want 
peace, or you would not have called upon the voice for PEACE to 
help you. 
His LESSON is not insane, but the CONFLICT IS. 


T 6 G 9. 
There can BE no conflict between sanity and insanity, be¬ 
cause only one is true, and therefore only ONE is REAL. 
The ego 
tries to persuade you that it is up to YOU to decide which voice is 
true. 
But the Holy Spirit teaches you that truth was created by God, 
and YOUR decision CANNOT change it. 
As you begin to realize the 
quiet power of His Voice AND ITS PERFECT CONSISTENCY, it 
MUST dawn on your minds that you are T(296) C 123 trying to undo a 
decision which was made irrevocably FOR you. 
That is why we 
suggested before that there was help in reminding yourselves to al¬ 
low the Holy Spirit to decide for God for YOU. 


T 6 G 10 . 
You are NOT asked to make insane decisions, although you 
are free to THINK you are. 
But it MUST be insane to believe IT IS 
UP TO YOU to decide what God's Creations ARE. 
The Holy Spirit 
perceives the conflict EXACTLY AS IT IS. 
Therefore, His second les¬ 
son is: To HAVE peace, TEACH peace to LEARN it. 


T 6 G 11. 
This is still a preliminary step, because having and being are 
still not equated but it is more advanced than the first step, which is 
really only a thought REVERSAL. 
The second step is a positive af¬ 
firmation of WHAT YOU WANT. 
This, then IS a step in the direc¬ 
tion OUT of conflict, because it means that alternatives have been 
considered, and ONE has been chosen as MORE DESIRABLE. 


T 6 G 12. 
But the evaluation "more desirable" still implies that the de¬ 
sirable has degrees. 
Therefore, although this step is essential for the 
ultimate decision, it is clearly NOT the final one. 


T 6 G 13. 
It should be clear that the recognition of the lack of order in 
miracles has not yet been accepted, because NOTHING is difficult 
that is WHOLLY DESIRED. 
To desire wholly is to CREATE, and 


1-256 


266 


Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


creating CANNOT be difficult if God Himself created you AS a 
creator. 
The second step, then, is still perceptual but it is neverthe¬ 
less a giant step toward the unified perception that parallels God's 
knowing. 
T(297) C 124 

T 6 G 14. 
As you take this step and HOLD THIS DIRECTION, you 
will be pushing toward the center of your thought system, where 
the FUNDAMENTAL change will occur. 
You are only beginning 
this step now, but you have started on this way by realizing that 
ONLY ONE WAY IS POSSIBLE. 
You do not yet realize this consis¬ 
tently, and so your progress is intermittent, but the second step is 
easier than the first, because it FOLLOWS. 
The very fact that you 
have accepted THAT is a demonstration of your growing awareness 
that the Holy Spirit WILL lead you on. 
T(298) C 125 

T 6 H. 
"Be Vigilant Only for God and His Kingdom" (Notes 
663 6:227) 

T 6 H l. 
For your own salvation you MUST be critical, because YOUR 
salvation IS critical to the whole Sonship. 
We said before that the 
Holy Spirit IS evaluative, and MUST be. 
Yet His evaluation does not 
extend BEYOND you, or you WOULD share it. 
In YOUR mind, and 
your mind ONLY, He sorts out the true from the false, and teaches 
you to judge every thought that you allow to ENTER in the light of 
what God PUT there. 
Whatever is IN ACCORD with this light He 
retains, to strengthen the Kingdom in YOU. 
When it is PARTLY in 
accord with truth He accepts it and purifies it. 
But what is OUT OF 
ACCORD ENTIRELY He rejects by judging against. 
This is how He 
keeps the Kingdom perfectly consistent and perfectly unified. 


T 6 H 2. 
But what you must remember is that what the Holy Spirit 
REJECTS the ego ACCEPTS. 
This is because they are in fundamental 
disagreement about everything, because they are in fundamental 
disagreement about WHAT YOU ARE. 
The ego's beliefs on this cru¬ 
cial issue vary, and that is why it promotes different moods. 
The 
Holy Spirit NEVER varies on this point, and so the ONE mood that 
He engenders is joy. 
He PROTECTS this by rejecting everything that 
does NOT foster joy, and so He alone can keep you wholly joyous. 



267 


1-257 



Volume I Text 


T 6 H 3. 
The Holy Spirit does not teach your mind to be critical of 
other minds, because He does not want you to teach your errors and 
LEARN THEM YOURSELVES. 
He would hardly be consistent if He 
allowed you to STRENGTHEN what you must learn to avoid. 
In the 
mind of the THINKER, then. 
He IS judgmental, but only in order to 
unify it so IT CAN perceive WITHOUT judgment. 
T(299) c 126 This 
enables the mind to TEACH without judgment and therefore learn 
to BE without judgment. 
The UNdoing is necessary only in YOUR 
mind, so that you cannot PROJECT it. 
God Himself has established 
what you can project with perfect safety. 
Therefore, the Holy Spirit's 
third lesson is: Be vigilant ONLY for God and HIS Kingdom. 


T 6 H 4. 
This is a major step toward FUNDAMENTAL change. 
Yet it 
is still a lesson in thought REVERSAL, because it implies that there 
is something you must be vigilant AGAINST. 
It has advanced far 
from the first lesson which was PRIMARILY a reversal, and also 
from the second, which was essentially the identification of what is 
MORE desirable. 
This step, which follows from the second as the 
second does from the first, emphasizes the DICHOTOMY between 
the desirable and the UNdesirable. 
It therefore makes the ULTI¬ 
MATE choice inevitable. 
But while the first step seems to IN¬ 
CREASE conflict, and the second still ENTAILS it to some extent, 
this one calls for CONSISTENT EFFORT AGAINST IT. 


T 6 H 5. 
We said already that you can be as vigilant AGAINST the 
ego as FOR it. 
This lesson teaches not that you CAN be, but that you 
MUST be. 
It does not concern itself with order of difficulty, but with 
CLEAR-CUT PRIORITY FOR VIGILANCE. 
This step is unequivocal 
in that it teaches THERE MUST BE NO EXCEPTIONS, but it does 
NOT deny that the temptations to MAKE exceptions will occur. 

Here, then, your consistency is called on DESPITE chaos. 
But chaos 
and consistency CANNOT coexist for long, because they are MU¬ 
TUALLY EXCLUSIVE T(300) -127 As long as you must be vigilant 
against ANYTHING, however, you are not recognizing this, and are 
holding the belief that you can CHOOSE EITHER ONE. 



1-258 


268 


Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


T 6 H 6. 
By teaching you WHAT to choose, the Holy Spirit will ulti¬ 
mately be able to teach you that YOU NEED NOT CHOOSE AT 
ALL. 
This will finally liberate your will FROM choice, and direct it 
toward creation WITHIN the Kingdom. 
Choosing through the Holy 
Spirit will only lead you TO it. 
You create by what you ARE, but 
this IS what you must learn. 
The way to learn it is INHERENT in the 
third step, which brings together the lessons inherent in the others, 
and goes beyond them toward real integration. 


T 6 H 7. 
If you allow yourselves to HAVE in your minds only what 
God put there, you are acknowledging your mind as God created it. 

Therefore, you are accepting it AS IT IS. 
And since it IS whole, you 
are teaching peace BECAUSE you have believed in it. 
The final step 
will still be taken FOR you by God. 
But by the third step, the Holy 
Spirit has PREPARED you FOR God. 
He is GETTING YOU READY 
to translate having into being by the very nature of the steps you 
must take WITH Him. 
You learn first that having rests on GIVING 
and NOT getting. 
Next you learn that you learn what you TEACH, 
and that you WANT TO LEARN PEACE. 
This is the CONDITION 
for identifying WITH the Kingdom, because it is the condition OF 
the Kingdom. 
T(301) -128 

T 6 H 8. 
But you have believed that you are WITHOUT the Kingdom, 
and have therefore excluded yourself FROM it in your belief. 
It is 
therefore essential to teach you that YOU must be INCLUDED, and 
the BELIEF THAT YOU ARE NOT is the ONLY thing that you must 
exclude. 


T 6 H 9. 
The third step is thus one of PROTECTION for your minds 
by allowing you to identify ONLY with the center, where God 
placed the altar to HIMSELF. 
We have already said that altars are 
BELIEFS, but God and His creations are BEYOND belief because 
they are beyond question. 
The Voice FOR God speaks only for BE¬ 
LIEF beyond question, but this IS the preparation for BEING with¬ 
out question. 


T 6 H 10 . 
As long as belief in God and His Kingdom is assailed by 
ANY doubts in your minds. 
His perfect Accomplishment is NOT 


269 


1-259 


Volume I Text 


apparent to you. 
This is why you MUST be vigilant ON GOD's BE¬ 
HALF. 
The ego speaks AGAINST His Creation, and therefore DOES 
engender doubt. 
You cannot go BEYOND belief UNTIL you believe 
wholly. 
No one can EXTEND a lesson he has NOT LEARNED 
FULLY. 
Transfer, which IS extension, is the measure of learning be¬ 
cause it is the MEASURABLE RESULT. 
This, however, does NOT 
mean that what it transfers TO is measurable. 
On the contrary, 
unless it transfers to the whole Sonship, which is immeasurable be¬ 
cause it was created BY the Immeasurable, the learning itself MUST 
be incomplete. 


T 6 H ll. 
To teach the WHOLE Sonship WITHOUT EXCEPTION 
demonstrates that you PERCEIVE ITS WHOLENESS and have 
learned that it IS One. 
Now you must be vigilant to HOLD its One¬ 
ness in your minds because if you allow doubt to enter, YOU will 
lose awareness of its wholeness, and WILL BE UNABLE TO TEACH 
IT. 
T(302) c 129 The wholeness of the Kingdom does NOT depend on 
your perception, but your AWARENESS of its wholeness DOES. 
It 
is only your awareness that NEEDS protection, because your BEING 
cannot be assailed. 
Yet a real sense of being CANNOT be yours 
while you are doubtful of what you ARE. 
THIS IS WHY VIGI¬ 
LANCE IS ESSENTIAL. 
Doubts ABOUT being MUST not enter your 
mind, or you CANNOT know what you are with certainty. 


T 6 H 12. 
Certainty is OF God for YOU. 
Vigilance is not necessary for 
truth, but it IS necessary AGAINST ILLUSION. 
Truth is WITHOUT 
illusions, and therefore WITHIN the Kingdom. 
Everything OUT¬ 
SIDE the Kingdom IS ILLUSION. 
But you must learn to ACCEPT 
truth because YOU THREW IT AWAY. 
You therefore saw yourself 
AS IF you were WITHOUT it. 
By making another Kingdom WHICH 
YOU VALUED, you did NOT keep the Kingdom of God alone in 
your minds, and thus placed part of your mind OUTSIDE of it. 


What you have made has thus DIVIDED YOUR WILL and given 
you a sick mind that MUST be healed. 
Your vigilance AGAINST this 
sickness IS the way to heal it. 



1-260 


270 


Chapter 6 - Attack and Fear 


T 6 H 13. 
Once YOUR mind is healed, it radiates health and thereby 
TEACHES healing. 
This establishes you as a teacher who teaches 
LIKE me. 
Vigilance was required of me as much as of you. 
But re¬ 
member that those who will to teach the same thing MUST be in 
agreement about what they believe. 


T 6 H 14. 
The third step, then, is a statement of what you WANT to 
believe, and entails a willingness to RELINQUISH EVERYTHING 
ELSE. 
I told you that you were just beginning the second step, but I 
also told you that the third one FOLLOWS it. 
The Holy Spirit WILL 
enable you to go on IF YOU FOLLOW HIM. 
Your vigilance is the 
sign that you WANT Him to guide you. 
T(303) C 130 Vigilance DOES 
require effort, but only to teach you that effort ITSELF is unneces¬ 
sary. 
You have exerted GREAT effort to preserve what you made 
BECAUSE it is NOT true. 
Therefore, you must now turn your effort 
AGAINST it. 
Only this can cancel out the NEED for effort, and call 
upon the BEING which you both HAVE and ARE. 
THIS recognition 
is wholly WITHOUT effort, because it is ALREADY true and needs 
no protection. 
It is in the perfect safety of God. 
Therefore, inclusion 
is total and Creation is WITHOUT LIMIT. 



PROOF 


271 


COPY 


1-261 


Volume I Text 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 

T 7 A. 
Introduction (Notes 675 7:7) 

T 7 A l. 
The creative power of both God AND His Creations is limit¬ 
less, but it is NOT in reciprocal relationship. 
You DO communicate 
fully WITH God, as He does with YOU. 
This is an ongoing process 
in which you SHARE, and BECAUSE you share it, you are inspired 
to create LIKE God. 
But in Creation you are NOT in a reciprocal re¬ 
lation TO God, because He created YOU, but you did NOT create 
Him. 
We have already stated that only in this respect your creative 
power differs from His. 
Even in this world there is a parallel. 
Par¬ 
ents give birth to children, but children do NOT give birth to par¬ 
ents. 
They DO, however, give birth to their children, and thus give 
birth AS their parents do. 


T 7 A 2. 
If you created GOD and He created you, the KINGDOM 
could not increase through its OWN creative thought. 
Creation 
would therefore be limited, and you would NOT be co-creators 
WITH God. 
As God's creative Thought proceeds FROM Him TO 
you, so must YOUR creative thoughts proceed FROM you to YOUR 
creations. 
In this way only can ALL creative power EXTEND OUT¬ 
WARD. 
T(304) c 131 God's accomplishments are NOT yours. 
But 
yours are LIKE His. 
HE created the Sonship, and YOU increase it. 

You HAVE the power to ADD to the Kingdom, but NOT to add to 
the Creator OF the Kingdom. 


T 7 A 3. 
You claim this power when you have become wholly vigilant 
for God AND the Kingdom. 
BY ACCEPTING this power as YOURS, 
you have learned to be what you ARE. 
YOUR creations belong in 
YOU, as YOU belong in God. 
You are part of God, as your sons are 
part of His Sons. 
To create is to love. 
Love extends outward simply 
because it cannot be contained. 
Being limitless, it DOES NOT STOP. 

It creates forever, but NOT in time. 
God's creations have ALWAYS 
BEEN, because HE has always been. 
YOUR creations have always 
been, because you can create only as HE creates. 



1-262 


272 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


T 7 A 4. 
Eternity is yours because He created you eternal. 


T 7 B. 
Bargaining versus Healing (Notes 677 7:9) 

T7B1. 
The ego demands RECIPROCAL rights, because it is competi¬ 
tive rather than loving. 
It is always willing to make a deal, but it 
cannot understand that to be LIKE another means that NO DEALS 
ARE POSSIBLE. 
To gain you must GIVE, not bargain. 
To bargain is 
to LIMIT giving, and this is NOT God's Will. 
To will WITH God is 
to create like HIM. 
God does not limit HIS gifts in ANY way. 
You 
ARE His gifts, and so your gifts must be like HIS. 


T 7 B 2. 
Your gifts TO the Kingdom are like His to YOU. 
I gave ONLY 
love to the Kingdom, because I believed that was what I WAS. 
What 
you believe you are DETERMINES your gifts, and if God created 
you by extending HIMSELF AS you, you can only extend YOUR¬ 
SELF as He did. 
Only joy increases forever. 
Joy and Eternity are IN¬ 
SEPARABLE. 
God extends outward beyond limits and beyond time, 
and you, who are co-creators with Him, extend His Kingdom for¬ 
ever and beyond limit. 
T(305) C 132 Eternity is the indelible stamp of 
Creation. 
The eternal are in peace and joy forever. 


T 7 B 3. 
To think like God is to share His certainty of WHAT YOU 
ARE. 
And to CREATE like Him is to share the perfect love He 
shares with YOU. 
To this the Holy Spirit leads you, that your joy 
may be complete 314 because the Kingdom of God is whole. 
We have 
said that the last step in the re-awakening of knowledge is taken by 
God. 
This is true, but it is hard to explain in words, because words 
are symbols, and nothing that is true NEEDS to be explained. 
How¬ 
ever, the Holy Spirit always has the task of translating the useLESS 
into the useFUL, the meaningLESS into the meaningFUL, and the 
temporary into the timeLESS. 
He CAN, therefore, tell you some¬ 
thing about this last step, but this one you must know yourself, be¬ 
cause BY it you know what you are. 
This IS your being. 



44 John 15:11 “These things I have spoken to you, that My joy may remain in you, and that your joy 
may be complete.” 


273 


1-263 



Volume I Text 


T 7 B 4. 
God does not take steps because His Accomplishments are 
NOT gradual. 
He does not teach, because His Creations are change¬ 
less. 
He does nothing LAST because He Created FIRST and FOR 
ALWAYS. 
It must be understood that the word "first" as applied to 
Him is NOT a time concept. 
He is first here only in the sense that He 
is first in the Holy Trinity Itself. 
He is the Prime Creator because HE 
created His co-creators. 
Because He DID, time applies neither to 
Him NOR to what He created. 
T(306) c 133 315 

T 7 B 5. 
The "last step" that God was said to take was therefore true 
in the beginning, is true now, and will be true forever . 
316 What is 
timeless IS ALWAYS THERE because its BEING is eternally change¬ 
less. 
It does NOT change by increase, because it was forever created 
TO increase. 
If you perceive it as NOT increasing, you do not know 
what it IS. 
You also do not know what created it, or who HE is. 
God 
does not REVEAL this to you, because it was never hidden. 
His light 
was never obscured, because it is His Will to SHARE it. 
How can 
what is fully shared be withheld and then revealed? 

T 7 B 6. 
To heal is the ONLY kind of thinking in this world that re¬ 
sembles the Thought of God, and because of the elements which 
they SHARE, can transfer TO it. 
When a brother perceives himself 
as sick, he IS perceiving himself as NOT WHOLE, and therefore IN 
NEED. 
If you, too, see him this way, you are seeing him as if he 
were ABSENT from the Kingdom or separated FROM it, thus mak¬ 
ing the Kingdom ITSELF obscure to BOTH OF YOU. 
Sickness and 
separation are not of God, but the Kingdom IS. 
If you obscure the 
Kingdom, you are perceiving WHAT IS NOT OF GOD. 


T 7 C. 
The Laws of Mind (Notes 682 7:14) 

T 7 C 1 . 
To heal, then, is to correct perception in your brother AND 
yourself by SHARING THE HOLY SPIRIT WITH HIM. 
This places 
you both WITHIN the Kingdom and restores ITS wholeness in your 


315 April 11. 
’66. 


316 Hebrews 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever. 



1-264 


274 



Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


minds. 
This PARALLELS creation because it UNIFIES BY IN¬ 
CREASING, and INTEGRATES BY EXTENDING. 


T 7 c 2. 
WHAT YOU PROJECT YOU BELIEVE. 
This is an immutable 
law of mind in this world as well as in the Kingdom. 
However, its 
CONTENT is somewhat different in this world from what it 
REALLY is, because the thoughts it governs are VERY different 
from the thoughts in the Kingdom. 
Laws must be adapted to cir¬ 
cumstances, if they are to maintain order. 
T(307) C 134 
T 7 C 3. 
The outstanding characteristic of the laws of mind, as they 
operate in this world, is that by obeying them, and I assure you that 
you MUST obey them, you can arrive at diametrically opposed re¬ 
sults. 
This is because the laws have adapted to the circumstances of 
this world, in which diametrically opposed outcomes are BELIEVED 
in. 
The laws of mind govern thoughts, and you DO respond to two 
conflicting voices. 
You have heard many arguments on behalf of 
"the freedoms," which would indeed have BEEN freedom if man 
had not chosen to FIGHT for them. 
That is why they perceive "the 
freedoms" as many instead of ONE. 


T 7 c 4. 
But the argument that underlies the DEFENSE of freedom is 
perfectly valid. 
Because it is true, it should not be FOUGHT for, but 
it SHOULD be sided WITH. 
Those who are AGAINST freedom be¬ 
lieve that its outcome will hurt them, which CANNOT be true. 
But 
those who are FOR freedom, even if they are misguided in HOW 
they defend it, are siding with the one thing in this world which IS 
true. 
Whenever anyone can listen fairly to both sides of ANY issue, 
he WILL make the right decision. 
This is because he HAS the an¬ 
swer. 
Conflict can indeed be projected, but it MUST be intrapersonal 
first. 


T 7 c 5. 
The term "intraPERSONAL" is an ego term, because "per¬ 
sonal" implies of ONE person, and NOT of others. 
"Interpersonal" 
has a similar error, because it implies something that exists between 
DIFFERENT individuals. 
When we spoke before of the extremely 
PERSONAL nature of revelation, we followed this statement imme¬ 
diately with a description of the inevitable outcomes of the revela- 


275 


1-265 


Volume I Text 


tion in terms of SHARING. 
A PERSON conceives of himself as sepa¬ 
rate, largely because he perceives OF himself as bounded by a body. 

ONLY if he perceives as a MIND can he overcome this. 
THEN he is 
free to use terms like "intraMENTAL" and "interMENTAL" 
WITHOUT seeing them as different and conflicting, because minds 
CAN be in perfect accord. 
T(308) C 135 

T 7 c 6. 
OUTSIDE the Kingdom, the law which prevails INSIDE it is 
ADAPTED to "what you project you believe." This is its TEACH¬ 
ING form, because outside the Kingdom teaching is mandatory be¬ 
cause learning is essential. 
This form of the law clearly implies that 
you will learn what YOU are from what you have projected onto 
others and therefore believe THEY are. 
IN the Kingdom, there is no 
teaching OR learning, because there is no BELIEF. 
There is only 
CERTAINTY. 
God and His Sons, in the surety of Being, KNOW that 
what you project you ARE. 


T 7 C 7. 
That form of the law is NOT adapted at all, being the Law of 
Creation. 
God Himself created the law by creating BY it. 
And His 
Sons, who create LIKE Him, follow it gladly, knowing that the IN¬ 
CREASE of the Kingdom depends on it, just as THEIR creation did. 

Laws must be communicated, if they are to be helpful. 
In effect, they 
must be TRANSLATED for those who speak a different language. 

But a good translator, though he MUST alter the FORM of what he 
translates, NEVER changes the meaning. 
In fact, his whole PUR¬ 
POSE is to change the form SO THAT the original meaning IS re¬ 
tained. 


T 7 c 8. 
The Holy Spirit IS the translator of the Laws of God to those 
who do NOT understand them. 
YOU could not do this yourselves 
because conflicted minds CANNOT be faithful to one meaning, and 
will therefore CHANGE THE MEANING TO PRESERVE THE 
FORM. 
The Holy Spirit's purpose in translating is naturally EX¬ 
ACTLY the opposite. 
He translates ONLY to preserve the original 
meaning in ALL respects and in ALL languages. 
Therefore, He OP¬ 
POSES differences in form as meaningful, and emphasizes always 
that THESE DIFFERENCES DO NOT MATTER. 
The meaning of His 


1-266 


276 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 

message is ALWAYS the same, and ONLY the meaning matters. 

T(309)C 136 

T 7 c 9. 
God's Law of Creation, in perfect form, does NOT involve 
the USE of truth to convince His sons OF truth. 
The EXTENSION of 
truth, which IS the Law of the Kingdom, rests only on the knowl¬ 
edge of WHAT TRUTH IS. 
This is your INHERITANCE, and re¬ 
quires no learning at all. 
But when you Disinherited YOURSELVES, 
you BECAME learners. 
No-one questions the intimate connection of 
learning and memory. 
Learning is impossible WITHOUT memory, 
because it CANNOT be consistent UNLESS it is remembered. 


T 7 c 10. 
That is why the Holy Spirit IS a lesson in remembering. 
We 
said before that He teaches remembering and FORGETTING, but 
the forgetting aspect is only TO MAKE THE REMEMBERING 
CONSISTENT. 
You forget to REMEMBER BETTER. 
You will NOT 
understand His translations while you listen to two ways of perceiv¬ 
ing them. 
Therefore, you must forget or relinquish one to UNDER¬ 
STAND the other. 
This is the only way you can LEARN consistency, 
so that you can finally BE consistent. 
What can the perfect consis¬ 
tency of the Kingdom MEAN to the confused? It MUST be apparent 
that confusion INTERFERES with meaning, and therefore PRE¬ 
VENTS THE LEARNER FROM APPRECIATING IT. 


T 7 c ll. 
There is NO confusion in the Kingdom, because there IS 
only one meaning. 
This Meaning comes from God and IS God. 
Be¬ 
cause it is also YOU, you share it and EXTEND it AS YOUR CREA¬ 
TOR DID. 
This needs no translation, because it is perfectly under¬ 
stood, but it DOES need extension because it MEANS extension. 

Communication here is perfectly direct and perfectly united. 
It is 
totally without strain, because nothing discordant EVER enters. 
That 
is why it IS the Kingdom of God. 
It belongs to Him and is therefore 
LIKE Him. 
That IS its reality, and nothing CAN assail it. 
T(310) C 
137 317 


317 April 17, 1966 


277 


1-267 



Volume I Text 

T 7 D. 
The Unified Curriculum (Notes 691 7:23) 

T 7 D l. 
To heal is to liberate totally. 
We once said there is no order in 
miracles because they are all MAXIMAL EXPRESSIONS OF LOVE. 

This has no range at all. 
The non-maximal only APPEARS to have a 
range. 
This is because it SEEMS to be meaningful to measure it 
FROM the maximum and identify its position by HOW MUCH IT IS 
NOT THERE. 
Actually, this does not mean ANYTHING. 
It is like 
negative numbers in that the concept can be used theoretically, but 
it has NO application practically. 
It is true that if you put three ap¬ 
ples on the table and then took them AWAY, the three apples are 
NOT THERE. 
But it is NOT true that the table is now MINUS three 
apples. 
If there is NOTHING on the table, it does NOT matter what 
WAS there in terms of amount. 
The "nothing" is neither greater nor 
less because of what is ABSENT. 


T 7 D 2. 
That is why "all" and "nothing" are dichotomous, WITHOUT 
A RANGE. 
This is perfectly clear in maximal test performance and 
for EXACTLY the reason you emphasize. 
You cannot interpret AT 
ALL, unless you assume either MAXIMAL motivation or its COM¬ 
PLETE ABSENCE. 
Only in these two conditions can you validly 
COMPARE responses, and you MUST assume the former, because if 
the LATTER is true, the subject WILL NOT DO ANYTHING. 
Given 
VARIABLE motivation he WILL do something, but you CANNOT 
UNDERSTAND WHAT IT IS. 


T 7 D 3. 
The RESULTS of tests are evaluated relatively, ASSUMING 
maximal motivation. 
But this is because we are dealing with ABILI¬ 
TIES, where degree of development IS meaningful. 
This does NOT 
mean that what ability is used FOR is necessarily either limited OR 
divided. 
But one thing is certain. 
Abilities are POTENTIALS for 
learning, and you will apply them to WHAT YOU WANT T(3ll) C 
138 TO LEARN. 
Learning is EFFORT, and effort MEANS will. 


T 7 D 4. 
You will notice that we have used the term "abilities" as a 
plural, which is correct. 
This is because abilities began with the ego, 
which perceived them as a POTENTIAL FOR EXCELLING. 
This is 
how the ego STILL perceives them and uses them. 
It does NOT 


1-268 


278 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


want to teach everyone all it has learned, because that would DE¬ 
FEAT its purpose in learning. 
Therefore, it does not REALLY learn 
at all. 
The Holy Spirit teaches YOU to use what the ego has made to 
TEACH the opposite of what the ego has LEARNED. 
The KIND of 
learning is as irrelevant as is the particular ability which was ap¬ 
plied TO the learning. 


T 7 D 5. 
You could not have a better example of the Holy Spirit's 
(this) unified purpose than this course. 
The Holy Spirit has taken 
very diversified areas of YOUR past learning, and has applied them 
to a UNIFIED curriculum. 
The fact that this was NOT the ego's rea¬ 
son for learning is totally irrelevant. 
YOU made the effort to learn, 
and the Holy Spirit has a unified goal for ALL effort. 
He ADAPTS 
the ego's potentials for excelling to potentials for EQUALIZING. 


This makes them USELESS for the ego's purpose, but VERY useful 
for His. 


T 7 D 6. 
If different abilities are applied long enough to one GOAL, 
the abilities THEMSELVES become unified. 
This is because they are 
channelized in one direction, or in one WAY. 
Ultimately, then, they 
all contribute to ONE RESULT, and by so doing, their SIMILARITY 
rather than their differences is emphasized. 
You can EXCEL in many 
DIFFERENT ways, but you can EQUALIZE in ONE WAY ONLY. 

Equality is NOT a variable state, by definition. 
T(312) c 139 
T 7 D 7. 
That is why we once said that papers will be easy to write 
when you have learned THIS course. 
To the ego there appears to be 
no connection, because the EGO is discontinuous. 
But the Holy 
Spirit teaches one lesson and applies it to ALL individuals in ALL 
situations. 
Being conflict free. 
He maximizes ALL efforts and ALL 
results. 
By teaching the power of the Kingdom of God Himself, He 
teaches you that ALL POWER IS YOURS. 
Its application does not 
matter. 
It is ALWAYS maximal. 
Your vigilance does NOT establish 
it as yours, but it DOES enable you to use it ALWAYS and in ALL 
WAYS. 



279 


1-269 


Volume I Text 


T 7 D 8. 
When I said, "Behold I am with you always," 318 1 meant it lit¬ 
erally. 
I am not absent to ANYONE nor in ANY situation. 
BECAUSE 
I am always with you, YOU are the Way, and the Truth, and the 
Light. 
319 YOU did not make this power any more than I did. 
It was 
created to BE shared, and therefore cannot be meaningfully per¬ 
ceived as BELONGING to anyone AT THE EXPENSE of another. 

This perception makes it meaningLESS by eliminating or overlook¬ 
ing its real and ONLY meaning. 


T 7 E. 
The Recognition of Truth (Notes 696 7:28) 

T 7 E l. 
God's MEANING waits in the Kingdom because that is 
where He placed it. 
It does NOT wait in time. 
It merely RESTS there 
(in the Kingdom) because it BELONGS there, as YOU do. 
How can 
you, who ARE God's meaning, perceive yourselves as absent FROM 
it? You can see yourselves as separated FROM your meaning only 
by EXPERIENCING YOURSELF AS UNREAL. 
This is WHY the ego 
is insane; it teaches that you are NOT what you ARE. 
This is so con¬ 
tradictory that it is clearly impossible. 
It is therefore a lesson which 
you CANNOT REALLY LEARN, and therefore CANNOT REALLY 
TEACH. 
But you ARE always teaching. 
You MUST, then, be teach¬ 
ing SOMETHING ELSE AS WELL, even though the ego DOES NOT 
KNOW WHAT IT IS. 
T(313) C 140 

T 7 E 2. 
The ego, then, IS always being undone, and DOES suspect 
your motives. 
Your mind CANNOT be unified in allegiance to the 
ego, because the mind does NOT BELONG to it. 
But what is 
"treacherous" to the ego IS faithful to peace. 
The ego's "enemy" is 
therefore YOUR friend. 
We said before that the ego's friend is not 
part of you but that is because the ego perceives itself as at war and 
therefore in need of allies. 
YOU, who are NOT at war, must look for 
brothers and RECOGNIZE all you see AS brothers, because ONLY 
EQUALS ARE AT PEACE. 



,l8 Matthew 28:20 “Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with 
you always, even to the end of the age.” Amen. 


319 John 14:6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. 
No one comes to the Father 
except through Me. 
Again, while the Biblical quote is “life” in ACIM, all versions, we find “light. 
” 


1-270 


280 



Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


T 7 E 3. 
Because God's equal Sons have everything, they CANNOT 
compete. 
But if they perceive ANY of their brothers as anything 
OTHER than their perfect equals, the IDEA of competition HAS en¬ 
tered their minds. 
Do not underestimate your need to be vigilant 
AGAINST this idea, because ALL your conflicts come FROM it. 
It IS 
the belief that conflicting interests are possible, and therefore means 
that you have accepted the IMpossible as true. 
How is that different 
from saying that you are perceiving YOURSELF as unreal? 

T 7 E 4. 
To be IN the Kingdom is merely to focus your full attention 
ON it. 
As long as you believe that you can ATTEND to what is NOT 
true, you are accepting conflict as your CHOICE. 
IS IT REALLY A 
CHOICE? It SEEMS to be, but seeming and reality are hardly the 
same. 
You who ARE the Kingdom are not concerned with seeming. 

Reality is yours because you ARE reality. 
This is how having and 
being are ultimately reconciled, NOT in the Kingdom, but IN YOUR 
MINDS. 
The altar there is the ONLY reality. 
It is PERFECTLY clear 
in its thought, because it is a reflection of PERFECT Thought. 
It 
SEES only brothers because it sees ONLY in its own Light. 
T(314) c 
141 

T 7 E 5. 
God has lit your minds Himself, and keeps your mind lit BY 
His light because His light is WHAT YOUR MINDS ARE. 
This is 
TOTALLY beyond question. 
And when YOU questioned it, you 
WERE answered. 
The answer merely UNDOES the question by es¬ 
tablishing the fact that to QUESTION reality is to question MEAN- 
INGLESSLY. 
That is why the Holy Spirit NEVER questions. 
Its sole 
function is to UNdo the questionable, and thus LEAD TO CER¬ 
TAINTY. 
The certain are perfectly calm, because they are not in 
doubt. 
They do NOT raise questions because NOTHING QUES¬ 
TIONABLE ENTERS THEIR MINDS. 
This holds them in perfect se¬ 
renity because this is what they SHARE, KNOWING what they are. 


T 7 E 6. 
Healing is both an art and a science, as has so often been said. 

It is an art because it depends on inspiration in the sense that we 
have already used the term. 
Inspiration is the opposite of dis- 
spiriting, and therefore means to make joyful. 
The dis-spirited are 


281 


1-271 



Volume I Text 


depressed because they believe that they are literally "without the 
Spirit," which is an illusion. 
You do not PUT the Spirit in them by 
inspiring them, because that would be "magic," and therefore 
would not be real healing. 
But you DO recognize the Spirit that is 
ALREADY THERE, and thereby REAWAKEN IT. 
This is why the 
healer is part of the Resurrection and the LIFE . 
The SPIRIT is not 
asleep in the minds of the sick, but the part of the mind that can per¬ 
ceive it and be glad IS. 
T(315) C 142 

T 7 E 7. 
Healing is also a science because it obeys the laws of God, 
whose laws are true. 
BECAUSE they are true, they are perfectly de¬ 
pendable, and therefore universal in application. 
The real aim of sci¬ 
ence is neither prediction nor control, but ONLY UNDERSTAND¬ 
ING. 
This is because it does NOT establish the laws it seeks; CAN¬ 
NOT discover them through prediction, and has NO control over 
them at all. 
Science is nothing more than an approach to WHAT 
ALREADY IS. 
Like inspiration, it can be misunderstood as magic, 
and WILL be whenever it is undertaken as SEPARATE from what 
already is, and perceived as a means for ESTABLISHING it. 
To be¬ 
lieve this is possible is to believe YOU CAN DO IT. 
This can ONLY 
be the voice of the ego. 


T 7 E 8. 
Truth can only be RECOGNIZED, and NEED only be recog¬ 
nized. 
Inspiration is of the Spirit, and certainty is of God according 
to His laws. 
Both therefore come from the same Source, because in¬ 
spiration comes from the voice FOR God and certainty comes from 
the laws OF God. 
Healing does not come DIRECTLY from God, 
who knows His Creations as perfectly whole. 
But healing is never¬ 
theless OF God, because it proceeds from His Voice and from His 
laws. 
It is their RESULT in a state of mind which does not know 
Him. 
The STATE is unknown to Him, and therefore does not exist. 

But those who sleep are stupefied, or better, UNAWARE. 
And BE¬ 
CAUSE they are unaware THEY DO NOT KNOW. 


T 7 E 9. 
The Holy Spirit must work THROUGH you to teach you He 
is IN you. 
This is an intermediary step toward the knowledge that 
YOU are in God BECAUSE YOU ARE PART OF HIM. 
The miracles 


1-272 


282 





Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


which the Holy Spirit inspires CAN have no order, because every 
part of Creation IS of one order. 
This is God's will AND yours. 
T(316) 
C 143 The laws of God ESTABLISH this, and the Holy Spirit reminds 
you OF it. 
When you heal, you are REMEMBERING THE LAWS OF 
GOD and FORGETTING the laws of the ego. 
We said before that 
forgetting is merely a way of REMEMBERING BETTER. 
It is there¬ 
fore NOT the opposite of remembering, when it is properly con¬ 
ceived. 
Perceived IMproperly, it induces a perception of CONFLICT 
WITH SOMETHING ELSE, as all incorrect perception does. 
PROP¬ 
ERLY perceived, it can be used as a way OUT of conflict, as all 
proper perception can. 


T 7 E 10. 
ALL abilities, then should be given over to the Holy Spirit, 
WHO KNOWS HOW TO USE THEM PROPERLY. 
He can use them 
ONLY for healing, because He knows you ONLY as whole. 
BY heal¬ 
ing you learn of wholeness, and by learning of wholeness you learn 
to remember God. 
You HAVE forgotten Him, but the Holy Spirit 
still knows that YOUR forgetting MUST be translated into a way of 
remembering, and NOT perceived as a SEPARATE ability which 
OPPOSES AN OPPOSITE. 
This is the way in which the ego tries to 
use ALL abilities, because its goal is ALWAYS to make YOU believe 
that YOU are in opposition. 


T 7 E ll. 
The ego's goal is as unified as the Holy Spirit's, and it is BE¬ 
CAUSE of this that their goals can NEVER be reconciled in ANY 
way or to ANY extent. 
The ego ALWAYS seeks to divide and sepa¬ 
rate. 
The Holy Spirit ALWAYS seeks to unify and HEAL. 
As you 
heal, you ARE healed because the Holy Spirit sees NO ORDER OF 
HEALING. 
Healing IS the way to undo the belief in differences, be¬ 
cause it is the ONLY way of perceiving the Sonship WITHOUT this 
belief. 
This perception is therefore IN accord with the laws of God 
even in a state of mind which is OUT of accord with His. 
T(317) C 144 
But the strength of right perception is so great that it brings the 
mind INTO accord with His, because it yields to His pull which IS 
in all of you. 



283 


1-273 


Volume I Text 


T 7 E 12. 
To oppose the pull or the will of God is not an ability but a 
real delusion. 
The ego believes that it HAS this ability, and can offer 
this ability to YOU as a gift. 
YOU DO NOT WANT IT. 
It is NOT a 
gift. 
It is NOTHING AT ALL. 
God HAS given you a gift, which you 
both HAVE and ARE. 
When you do not USE it, you do not know 
you HAVE it. 
By not knowing this, you do NOT know what you 
ARE. 
Healing, then, is a way of APPROACHING knowledge by 
THINKING in accordance with the laws of God and RECOGNIZ¬ 
ING THEIR UNIVERSALITY. 
WITHOUT this recognition, you have 
made the laws themselves meaningless TO you. 
But the LAWS are 
not meaningless, because all meaning is contained BY them, and IN 
them. 


T 7 E 13. 
Seek ye FIRST the Kingdom of Heaven , 320 because that is 
where the laws of God operate truly, and they can operate ONLY 
truly, because they are the laws of Truth. 
But SEEK THIS ONLY, 
because you can FIND nothing else. 
There IS nothing else. 
God is all 
in all 321 in a very literal sense. 
All being 322 is in Him because He IS all 
Being. 
YOU are therefore in Him because YOUR being IS His. 
Heal¬ 
ing is a way of FORGETTING the sense of danger that the ego has 
induced in YOU by not recognizing its existence in your brothers. 

This strengthens the Holy Spirit in BOTH of you, because it is a RE¬ 
FUSAL TO ACKNOWLEDGE FEAR. 
Love needs only this invita¬ 
tion. 
It comes freely to ALL the Sonship, because it is what the Son- 
ship IS. 
T(318) c 145 By their awakening TO it, they merely forget 
what they are NOT. 
This enables them to remember what they ARE. 



320 Matthew 6:33 “But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall 
be added to you.” 

j21 1 Corinthians 15:28 Now when all things are made subject to Him, then the Son Himself will also 
be subject to Him who put all things under Him, that God may be all in all. 


Ephesians 1:23 Which is His body, the fullness of Him who fills all in all. 


22 Acts 17:28 for in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have 
said, “For we are also His offspring.” 


1-274 


284 



Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 

T 7 F. 
Healing and the Changelessness of Mind (Notes 707 
7:39) 

T 7 F 1. 
The body is nothing more than a framework for developing 
abilities. 
It is therefore a means for developing potentials, which is 
quite apart from what the potential is used FOR. 
This IS a decision. 

The effects of the ego's decision in this matter are so apparent that 
they need no elaboration here. 
But the Holy Spirit's decision to use 
the body ONLY for communication has such direct connection with 
healing that it DOES need clarification. 
The unhealed healer OBVI¬ 
OUSLY does not understand his own vocation. 


T 7 F 2. 
ONLY minds communicate. 
Since the ego CANNOT obliter¬ 
ate the impulse to communicate because it is also the impulse to 
CREATE it can only try to teach you that the BODY can both com¬ 
municate AND create, and therefore DOES NOT NEED THE MIND. 

The ego, then, tries to teach you that the body can ACT like the 
mind, and therefore IS self-sufficient. 
But we have learned that be¬ 
havior is NOT the level for either teaching OR learning. 
This MUST 
be so, because you CAN act in accordance with what you do NOT 
believe. 
But this will weaken you as teachers AND learners because, 
as has been repeatedly emphasized, you teach what you DO believe. 

An inconsistent lesson WILL be poorly taught and POORLY 
LEARNED. 
If you teach both sickness AND healing, you ARE both 
a poor teacher and a poor learner. 
T(319) C 146 

T 7 F 3. 
Healing is the one ability that everyone CAN develop, and 
MUST develop, if he is to BE healed. 
Healing IS the Holy Spirit's 
form of communication, and THE ONLY ONE HE KNOWS. 
He rec¬ 
ognizes no other, because he does NOT accept the ego's confusion of 
mind and body. 
Minds CAN communicate, but they CANNOT hurt. 

The body in the service of the ego can hurt other BODIES, but this 
CANNOT occur UNLESS the body has ALREADY been confused 
WITH the mind. 
This fact, too, can be used either for healing or for 
magic, but you must realize that magic is ALWAYS the belief that 
healing is HARMFUL. 
This is its totally insane premise, and so it 
proceeds accordingly. 



285 


1-275 



Volume I Text 


T 7 F 4. 
Healing ONLY STRENGTHENS. 
Magic always tries to 
weaken. 
Healing perceives NOTHING in the healer that everyone 
else does not share WITH him. 
Magic ALWAYS sees something 
special in the healer, which he believes he can offer as a gift to 
someone who does NOT have it. 
He may believe that this gift comes 
from God TO him, but it is quite evident that he does NOT under¬ 
stand God if he thinks HE has something that others DO NOT. 
You 
might well ask why SOME healing CAN result from this kind of 
thinking, and there is a real reason for this. 


T 7 F 5. 
However misguided the "magical healer" may be, and how¬ 
ever much he may be trying to strengthen his ego, HE IS ALSO 
TRYING TO HELP. 
He IS conflicted and unstable, but AT TIMES he 
is offering SOMETHING to the Sonship, and the ONLY thing the 
Sonship can ACCEPT IS healing. 
When the so-called healing 
"works," then, the impulse both to help and BE helped have coin¬ 
cided. 
This is co-incidental, because the healer may NOT be experi¬ 
encing HIMSELF as truly helpful at the time, and the belief that he 
IS, in the mind of ANOTHER, HELPS HIM. 
T(320) C 147 

T 7 F 6. 
The Holy Spirit does NOT work by chance, and the healing 
that is of HIM ALWAYS works. 
And unless the healer ALWAYS 
heals BY Him, the results WILL vary. 
But healing itself IS consis¬ 
tence, because ONLY consistence is conflict-free, and only the con¬ 
flict-free ARE whole. 
By accepting exceptions, and acknowledging 
that he can SOMETIMES heal and SOMETIMES not, the healer is 
OBVIOUSLY accepting INconsistency. 
He is therefore IN conflict 
and TEACHING conflict. 


T 7 F 7. 
Can ANYTHING of God NOT be for all and always? Love is 
incapable of ANY exceptions. 
Only if there is fear does the whole 
IDEA of exceptions of any kind seem to be meaningful. 
Exceptions 
ARE fearful because they were made BY fear. 
The "fearful healer" is 
a contradiction in terms, and is therefore a concept that ONLY a 
conflicted mind could POSSIBLY perceive as meaningful. 
Fear does 
NOT gladden. 
Healing DOES. 
Fear ALWAYS makes exceptions. 

Healing NEVER does. 
Fear produces dissociation because it induces 


1-276 


286 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


SEPARATION. 
Healing ALWAYS induces harmony because it pro¬ 
ceeds from integration. 


T 7 F 8. 
Healing is predictable BECAUSE it can be counted on. 
EVE¬ 
RYTHING that is of God can be counted on, because everything of 
God is WHOLLY REAL. 
HEALING can be counted on BECAUSE it 
is inspired by His voice, and is in accord with His laws. 
But if heal¬ 
ing IS consistence, it CANNOT be inconsistently understood. 
Un¬ 
derstanding MEANS consistence, because GOD means consistence. 

And because that IS His Meaning, it is also YOURS. 
YOUR meaning 
CANNOT be out of accord with His, because your whole meaning, 
and your ONLY meaning, comes FROM His and is LIKE His. 
God 
CANNOT be out of accord with HIMSELF, and YOU cannot be out 
of accord with Him. 
You cannot separate your SELF from YOUR 

Creator, who created YOU by sharing HIS Being WITH you. 
T(32l) c 
148 

T 7 F 9. 
The unhealed healer wants gratitude FROM his brothers, but 
he is NOT grateful to them. 
This is because he thinks he is giving 
something TO them, and is NOT receiving something equally desir¬ 
able in return. 
His TEACHING is limited because he is LEARNING 
so little. 
His HEALING lesson is limited by his own ingratitude, 
which is a lesson in sickness. 
Learning is constant and so vital in its 
power for change that a Son of God can recognize his power in an 
instant, and change the world in the next. 
That is because by chang¬ 
ing HIS mind he has changed the most powerful device that was 
ever created FOR change. 


T 7 F 10. 
This in no way contradicts the changelessness of mind as 
GOD created it. 
But YOU think that you HAVE changed it, as long 
as you learn through the ego. 
This DOES place you in a position of 
needing to learn a lesson which SEEMS contradictory: you must 
learn to change your mind ABOUT your mind. 
Only by this can you 
learn that it IS changeless. 


T 7 F 11. 
When you heal, that is exactly what you ARE learning (do¬ 
ing). 
You are recognizing the changeless mind in your brother by 
perceiving (knowing) that he could NOT have changed his mind. 



287 


1-277 




Volume I Text 


That is how you perceive the Holy Spirit in him. 
It is ONLY the 
Holy Spirit in him that never changes His mind. 
He himself must 
think he CAN, or he would not perceive himself as sick. 
He there¬ 
fore does not know what his self IS. 
If YOU see only the changeless 
in him, you have not really changed him at all. 
But by changing 
your mind about HIS FOR him, you help him undo the change his 
ego thinks it has made in him. 
As you can hear two voices, so you 
can see in two ways. 
One way shows you an image, or better, an 
idol which you may worship out of fear, but which you will never 
love. 
The other shows you only truth, which you will love because 
you will UNDERSTAND it. 
Understanding is APPRECIATION, be¬ 
cause what you understand you can identify WITH, and by making 
it part of YOU you have accepted it with love. 
T(322) c 149 This is 
how God Himself created YOU, in understanding, in appreciation, 
and in love. 


T 7 F12. 
The ego is totally unable to understand this, because it does 
NOT understand what it makes. 
It does NOT appreciate it, and it 
does NOT love it. 
It incorporates to TAKE AWAY. 
It literally be¬ 
lieves that every time it deprives someone of something IT has in¬ 
creased. 
We have spoken often of the INCREASE of the Kingdom by 
YOUR creations, which can only BE created as YOU were. 


T 7 F13. 
The whole glory and perfect joy that IS the Kingdom lies in 
you to give. 
Do you not WANT to give it? You CANNOT forget the 
Father because I am with you and I CANNOT forget Him. 
To forget 
ME is to forget yourself and Him who created you. 
Our brothers 
ARE forgetful. 
That is why they need your remembrance 323 of Me 
and Him who created Me. 
Through this remembrance you can 
change THEIR minds about themselves, as I can change YOURS. 



323 Luke 22:19 And He took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is My 
body which is given for you; do this in remembrance of Me.” 

1 Corinthians 11:24-25 And when He had given thanks, He broke it and said, “Take, eat; this is My 
body which is broken for you; do this in remembrance of Me.” In the same manner He also took the cup 
after supper, saying, “This cup is the new covenant in My blood. 
This do, as often as you drink it, in 
remembrance of Me.” 


1-278 


288 



Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


Your minds are so powerful a light that you can look into theirs and 
enlighten them, as I can enlighten yours. 


T 7 F 14.1 do not want to share my BODY in communion because this 
is to share nothing. 
Would I try to share an illusion with the most 
holy children of a most Holy Father? But I do want to share my 
MIND with you because we ARE of one Mind, and that Mind IS 
ours. 
See ONLY this Mind everywhere, because only this IS every¬ 
where and in everything. 
It IS everything, because it encompasses 
all things within ITSELF. 
Blessed 324 are you who perceive only this, 
because you perceive only what is true. 
Come therefore unto me 
and learn of the truth in YOU. 
325 T(323) C 150 

T 7 F 15. 
The mind WE share IS shared by all our brothers, and as we 
see them truly, they WILL be healed. 
Let YOUR minds shine with 
mine upon their minds, and by our gratitude to them make THEM 
aware of the light in THEM . 
This light will shine back upon YOU 
and on the whole Sonship because this IS your proper gift to God. 

He will accept it and give it to the Sonship, because it is acceptable 
to Him, and therefore to His Sons. 
This is the true communion of the 
Spirit Who sees the altar of God in everyone, and by bringing it to 

YOUR appreciation calls upon you to love God and His Creation. 

T(324)C 151 

T 7 G. 
From Vigilance to Peace (Notes 720 7:52) 

T 7 G l. 
You can think of the Sonship ONLY as one. 
This is part of the 
law of Creation, and therefore governs ALL thought. 
You can PER¬ 
CEIVE the Sonship as fragmented, but it is IMPOSSIBLE for you to 
see something in part of it that you will not attribute to ALL of it. 

That is why attack is NEVER discrete. 
And why attack MUST be re¬ 
linquished entirely. 
If it is NOT relinquished entirely, it is not relin¬ 
quished at all. 
Fear and love are equally reciprocal. 
They make or 
create depending on whether the ego or the Holy Spirit begets or 
inspires them, but they WILL return to the mind of the thinker, and 


324 Matthew 5:3-11, The Beatitudes “Blessed are they ...” 

’ 23 Matthew 11:28 “Come to Me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 


289 


1-279 




Volume I Text 


they WILL affect his total perception. 
That includes his perception of 
God, of His Creations, and of his own. 
He will not appreciate ANY 
of these if he regards them fearfully. 
He will appreciate ALL of them 
if he regards them with love. 


T 7 G 2. 
The mind that accepts attack CANNOT love. 
This is because 
it believes that it can DESTROY love, and therefore does not under¬ 
stand what love IS. 
If it does not understand what love IS, it CAN¬ 
NOT perceive itself as loving. 
This loses the awareness of being; in¬ 
duces feelings of unreality; and results in utter confusion. 
Your own 
thinking has done this, because of its power. 
But your own thinking 
can also save you FROM this, because its power is not of your mak¬ 
ing. 
Your ability to DIRECT your thinking as you will IS part of its 
power. 
If you do not believe you can do this, you have DENIED the 
power of your thought, and thus rendered it powerLESS in your 
belief. 
T(325) C 152 

T 7 G 3. 
The ingeniousness of the ego to preserve itself is enormous, 
but it stems from the power of the mind WHICH THE EGO DE¬ 
NIES. 
This means that the ego attacks WHAT IS PRESERVING IT, 
and this MUST be a source of extreme anxiety. 
This is why it 
NEVER knows what it is doing. 
This is perfectly logical, though 
clearly insane. 
The ego draws upon the one source which is totally 
inimitable to its existence FOR its existence. 
Fearful of perceiving the 
POWER of this source, it is forced to DEPRECIATE it. 
This threatens 
its OWN existence, a state which it finds intolerable. 


T 7 G 4. 
Remaining logical but still insane, the ego resolves this com¬ 
pletely insane dilemma in a completely insane way. 
It does not per¬ 
ceive ITS existence as threatened, by projecting the threat onto YOU, 
and perceiving your BEING as NONexistent. 
This ensures ITS con¬ 
tinuance, if you side WITH it, by guaranteeing that you will NOT 
know your OWN safety. 
The ego CANNOT AFFORD TO KNOW 
ANYTHING. 
Knowledge is total, and the ego DOES NOT BELIEVE 
IN TOTALITY. 
This unbelief is its own origin, and while the ego 
does not love YOU, it IS faithful to its own antecedent, begetting as 
it was begotten. 



1-280 


290 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


T 7 G 5. 
Mind ALWAYS REproduces as it was produced. 
Produced 
by fear, the ego REproduces fear. 
This IS its allegiance, and this alle¬ 
giance makes it treacherous to love BECAUSE you are love. 
Love IS 
your power, which the ego MUST deny. 
It must also deny every¬ 
thing which this power gives TO you, BECAUSE it gives you every¬ 
thing. 
No-one who has everything WANTS the ego. 
Its own maker, 
then, DOES NOT WANT IT. 
Rejection is therefore the only decision 
which the ego could POSSIBLY encounter if the mind which made it 
knew ITSELF. 
And if it recognized ANY part of the Sonship, it 
WOULD know itself. 
T(326) c 153 

T 7 G 6. 
The ego therefore opposes ALL appreciation, ALL recogni¬ 
tion, ALL sane perception, and ALL knowledge. 
It perceives their 
threat as total because it senses the fact that all commitments which 
the mind makes ARE total. 
Forced therefore to detach itself from 
you who ARE mind, it is willing to attach itself to anything ELSE. 

But there IS nothing else. 
It does NOT follow, however, that the 
mind cannot make illusions. 
But it DOES follow that if it makes illu¬ 
sions it will BELIEVE in them, because THAT IS HOW IT MADE 
THEM. 


T 7 G 7. 
The Holy Spirit undoes illusions without attacking them 
merely because He cannot perceive them at all. 
They therefore do 
not exist for Him. 
He resolves the APPARENT conflict which they 
engender by perceiving CONFLICT as meaningless. 
We said before 
that the Holy Spirit perceives the conflict EXACTLY AS IT IS, and it 
IS meaningless. 
The Holy Spirit does not want you to UNDER¬ 
STAND conflict. 
He wants you to realize that BECAUSE conflict is 
meaningLESS it cannot BE understood. 
WE have already said that 
understanding brings appreciation, and appreciation brings love. 

Nothing else CAN be understood because nothing else is real and 
therefore nothing else HAS meaning. 


T 7 G 8. 
If you will keep in mind what the Holy Spirit offers you, you 
cannot be vigilant for anything BUT God and His Kingdom. 
The 
ONLY reason why you find this difficult is because you think there 
IS something else. 
Belief does not require vigilance UNLESS it is 


291 


1-281 


Volume I Text 


conflicted. 
If it IS, there ARE conflicting components within it which 
have engendered a state of war, and vigilance has therefore BE¬ 
COME essential. 
Vigilance has no place at all in peace. 
It is neces¬ 
sary ONLY AGAINST beliefs which are NOT true, and would never 
have been called upon by the Holy Spirit if you had not believed the 
untrue yourselves. 
T(327) C 154 

T 7 G 9. 
But you CANNOT deny that when you BELIEVE something 
you HAVE made it true FOR YOU. 
When YOU believe what God 
DOES NOT KNOW, your thought seems to CONTRADICT His, and 
this makes it appear AS IF YOU ARE ATTACKING HIM. 
We have 
repeatedly emphasized that the ego DOES believe it can attack God, 
and tries to persuade you that YOU have done this. 
If the mind 
CANNOT attack, the ego proceeds perfectly logically to the position 
that YOU cannot be mind. 
By not seeing you as YOU are, it can see 
ITSELF as it WANTS to be. 
Aware of its weakness, the ego wants 
your allegiance, but NOT as you really are. 
The ego therefore wants 
to engage your mind in its OWN delusional system, because other¬ 
wise the light of YOUR understanding WILL dispel it. 


T 7 G 10. 
The ego wants no part of truth, because the truth is that IT is 
not true. 
If truth is total, the UNtrue CANNOT exist. 
Commitment 
to either MUST be total, because they cannot co-exist in your minds 
WITHOUT splitting them. 
If they cannot coexist in peace, and if you 
WANT peace, you MUST give up the IDEA of conflict ENTIRELY, 
and for ALL TIME. 
This requires vigilance ONLY as long as YOU 
DO NOT RECOGNIZE WHAT IS TRUE. 
While you believe that two 
totally contradictory thought systems SHARE truth, your need for 
vigilance is apparent. 
Your minds ARE dividing their allegiance be¬ 
tween two kingdoms, and YOU are totally committed to neither. 

T(328)C 155 

T 7 G 11. 
Your identification with the Kingdom is totally beyond 
question except by you WHEN YOU ARE THINKING INSANELY. 

What you are is NOT established by your perception, and is NOT 
influenced BY it at all. 
ALL perceived problems in identification at 
ANY level ARE NOT PROBLEMS OF FACT. 
But they ARE prob- 


1-282 


292 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


lems in UNDERSTANDING, because they MEAN that you perceive 
WHAT you can understand as UP TO YOU TO DECIDE. 
The ego 
believes THIS totally, being fully committed TO it. 
But it is NOT 
TRUE. 
The ego is therefore totally committed to UNtruth, perceiv¬ 
ing in total contradiction to the Holy Spirit and to the knowledge of 
God. 


T 7 G 12. 
You can be perceived with meaning ONLY by the Holy 
Spirit, because your being IS the knowledge of God. 
ANY belief that 
you accept which is APART from this WILL obscure God's voice in 
you, and will therefore obscure God TO you. 
Unless you perceive 
His Creation truly, you CANNOT know the Creator, because God 
and His Creation ARE NOT SEPARATE. 
The Oneness of the Creator 
and the Creation IS your wholeness, your sanity, and your limitless 
power. 
This limitless power is God's gift to you, because it is WHAT 
YOU ARE. 
If you dissociate your mind FROM it, you are perceiving 
the most powerful force in the universe of thought AS IF it were 
weak, because you do NOT believe YOU are part of it. 


T 7 G 13. 
Perceived WITHOUT your part IN it, God's Creation IS per¬ 
ceived as weak, and those who SEE themselves as weakened DO 
attack. 
The attack MUST be blind, because there is nothing TO at¬ 
tack. 
Therefore, they make up images, perceive them as unworthy, 
and attack them for their unworthiness. 
That is all the world of the 
ego is. 
NOTHING. 
It has no meaning. 
It does not exist. 
Do not TRY 
to understand it, because if you do you are believing that it CAN be 
understood, and therefore is capable of being appreciated and 
loved. 
This WOULD justify it, but it CANNOT BE justified. 
YOU 
cannot make the meaningLESS meaningFUL. 
This can ONLY be an 
insane attempt. 
T(329) -156 

T 7 G 14. 
Allowing INsanity to enter your minds means that you have 
not judged sanity AS WHOLLY DESIRABLE. 
If you WANT some¬ 
thing else, you WILL MAKE something else. 
But because it IS some¬ 
thing else it WILL attack your thought system and divide your alle¬ 
giance. 
You CANNOT create in this divided state, and you MUST 
be vigilant AGAINST this divided state because ONLY peace CAN 


293 


1-283 


Volume I Text 


BE extended. 
Your divided minds ARE blocking the extension of the 
Kingdom, and its extension IS your joy. 
If you do not extend the 
Kingdom, you are NOT thinking with your Creator and creating as 
He created. 


T 7 G 15. 
In this depressing state, the Holy Spirit reminds you gently 
that you are sad because you are not fulfilling your function as co¬ 
creators WITH God, and are therefore depriving YOURSELVES of 
joy. 
This is not God's will, but YOURS. 
If your will is out of accord 
with God's, YOU ARE WILLING WITHOUT MEANING. 
But be¬ 
cause ONLY God's will is unchangeable, no REAL conflict of will is 
possible. 
This is the Holy Spirit's perfectly consistent teaching. 
Crea¬ 
tion, not separation, IS your will BECAUSE it is God's. 
And nothing 
that opposes this means anything at all. 
Being a perfect Accom¬ 
plishment, the Sonship can only accomplish perfectly, EXTENDING 
the joy in which it was created, and identifying itself with both its 
Creator and its creations, KNOWING they are One. 
T(330) c 157 

T 7 H. 
The Total Commitment (Notes 537 6:101) 

T 7 H l. 
Whenever you deny a blessing to a brother, YOU will feel 
deprived. 
This is because denial is as total as love. 
It is as impossible 
to deny part of the Sonship as it is to love it in part. 
Nor is it possible 
to love it totally AT TIMES. 
You CANNOT be totally committed 
SOMETIMES. 
Remember a very early lesson, — "never underesti¬ 
mate the power of denial." It has no power in ITSELF, but YOU can 
give it the power of YOUR mind, whose power is without limit of 
ANY kind. 
If you use it to deny reality, reality is gone FOR YOU. 

REALITY CANNOT BE PARTLY APPRECIATED. 
That is why de¬ 
nying any part of it means you have lost awareness of ALL of it. 


T 7 H 2. 
That is the negative side of the law as it operates in this 
world. 
But denial is a defense, and so it is as capable of being used 
positively as it is of being used destructively. 
Used negatively, it 
WILL be destructive, because it will be used for attack. 
But in the 
service of the Holy Spirit, the law becomes as beneficent as all of the 
laws of God. 
Stated positively, the law requires you only to recog¬ 
nize PART of reality to appreciate ALL of it. 
Mind is too powerful to 


1-284 


294 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


be subject to exclusion. 
You will NEVER be able to exclude yourself 
from what you project. 


T 7 H 3. 
When a brother acts insanely, he is offering you an opportu¬ 
nity to bless him. 
His need is YOURS. 
YOU need the blessing you 
can offer him. 
There is no way for you to have it EXCEPT by giving 
it. 
This IS the law of God, and it HAS NO EXCEPTIONS. 
What you 
deny you LACK, not because it IS lacking, but because you have de¬ 
nied it in another, and therefore are not aware of it in YOU. 
Every 
response you make is determined by what you think you ARE. 
And 
what you WANT to be IS what you think you are. 
Therefore, what 
you WANT to be determines every response you make. 
T(33l) C 158 
T 7 H 4. 
You do NOT need God's blessing, because that you have for¬ 
ever. 
But you DO need YOURS. 
The picture you see of yourselves is 
deprived, unloving, and very vulnerable. 
You CANNOT love this. 

But you can very easily escape FROM it, or better, leave it behind. 

You are NOT there, and that is not YOU. 
Do not see this picture in 
anyone, or you HAVE accepted it as you. 
ALL illusions about the 
Sonship are DISPELLED together, as they were MADE together. 

Teach no-one that HE is what YOU do not want to be. 
Your brother 
is the mirror in which you will see the image of yourself as long as 
perception lasts. 
And perception WILL last until the Sonship knows 
itself as whole. 
T(332) C 159 

T 7 H 5. 
You MADE perception, and it MUST last as long as you 
WANT it. 
Illusions are investments. 
They will last as long as you 
value them. 
Values are relative, but they are powerful because they 
are MENTAL TUDGMENTS . 
The only way to dispel illusions is to 
withdraw ALL investment from them, and they will HAVE no life 
for you because you have put them OUT OF YOUR MIND. 
While 
you include them IN it, you are GIVING them life. 
Except there is 
nothing there to receive your gift. 


T 7 H 6. 
The gift of life IS yours to give, because it was given YOU. 

You are unaware of YOUR gift BECAUSE you do not give it. 
You 
CANNOT make nothing live, because it cannot BE enlivened. 
There¬ 
fore, you have NOT extended the gift you both have and are, and so 


295 


1-285 



Volume I Text 


you do NOT know your being. 
All confusion comes from not ex¬ 
tending life, because this is NOT the will of your Creator. 
You CAN 
do nothing apart from Him, and you DO do nothing apart from 
him. 
Keep His Way to remember yourselves, and teach His Ways 
lest you forget yourself. 
Give only honor to the sons of the living 
God, 326 and count yourself among them gladly. 


T 7 H 7. 
ONLY honor is a fitting gift for those whom God Himself 
created worthy of honor and whom He honors. 
Give them the ap¬ 
preciation which God accords them always, because they are His 
Beloved Sons in whom He is well pleased. 
327 You CANNOT be apart 
from them, because you are not apart from Him. 
Rest in His love, 
and protect your rest by loving. 
But love EVERYTHING He created, 
of which YOU are part, or you cannot learn of His peace and accept 
His gift FOR yourself and AS yourself. 
T(333) C 160 You CANNOT 
know your own perfection until you have honored all those who 
were created LIKE you. 


T 7 H 8. 
One Child of God is the only teacher sufficiently worthy to 
teach another. 
One Teacher is in all your minds, and He teaches the 
same lesson to all. 
He always teaches you the inestimable worth of 
EVERY Son of God, teaching it with infinite patience born of the 
Love of Him for whom He speaks. 
Every attack is a call for His pa¬ 
tience, because ONLY His patience can translate attack into blessing. 

Those who attack DO NOT KNOW THEY ARE BLESSED. 
They at¬ 
tack BECAUSE THEY BELIEVE THEY ARE DEPRIVED. 
Give there¬ 
fore of YOUR abundance, and teach them THEIRS. 
Do not share 
their delusions of scarcity, or you will perceive YOURSELF as lack¬ 
ing. 


T 7 H 9. 
Attack could never PROMOTE attack unless you perceived it 
as a means of depriving you of SOMETHING YOU WANT. 
But you 
cannot lose ANYTHING unless YOU do not value it and therefore 


326 John 6:69 Also we have come to believe and know that You are the Christ, the Son of the living 
God.” 

’ 27 Matthew 3:17 And suddenly a voice came from heaven, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased.” 


1-286 


296 




Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


DO NOT WANT IT. 
This makes you feel DEPRIVED of it, and by 
projecting YOUR rejection, you believe that others are TAKING IT 
FROM YOU. 
One MUST be fearful if he believes that his brother is 
attacking him to tear the Kingdom of Heaven from him. 


T 7 H to. 
This is the ultimate basis for ALL of the ego's projection. 
Be¬ 
ing the part of your mind which does NOT believe it is responsible 
for ITSELF, and being without allegiance to God, it is incapable of 
trust. 
Projecting its insane belief that YOU have been treacherous to 
YOUR Creator, it believes that your brothers, who are as incapable 
of this as you are, are out to TAKE GOD FROM YOU. 
T(334) c 161 
Whenever a brother attacks another, THIS IS WHAT HE BELIEVES. 

Projection ALWAYS sees YOUR will in others. 
If you will to sepa¬ 
rate YOURSELF from God, that is what you will think others are 
doing TO you. 


T 7 H ll. 
You ARE the will of God. 
Do not accept anything else AS 
YOUR will, or you ARE denying what you are. 
Deny THIS and you 
WILL attack, because you believe you have BEEN attacked. 
But see 
the love of God in you, and you will see it everywhere because it IS 
everywhere. 
See His abundance in everyone, and you will know 
that you are in Him WITH them. 
They are part of you as you are 
part of God. 
YOU are as lonely without understanding this as God 
Himself is lonely when His Sons do not know Him. 
The peace of 
God IS understanding this. 


T 7 H 12. 
There is only one way out of the world's thinking, just as 
there was only one way INTO it. 
Understand totally by understand¬ 
ing TOTALITY. 
Perceive ANY part of the ego's thought system as 
wholly insane, wholly delusional, and wholly undesirable, and you 
have CORRECTLY EVALUATED ALL OF IT. 
This correction en¬ 
ables you to perceive ANY part of Creation as wholly real, wholly 
perfect, and WHOLLY DESIRABLE. 
Wanting this ONLY, you will 
HAVE this only, and giving this only, you will BE only this. 
The 
gifts you offer to the ego are ALWAYS experienced as sacrifices. 
But 
the gifts you offer to the Kingdom are gifts to YOU. 
They will al¬ 
ways be treasured by God, because they belong to His Beloved Sons 


297 


1-287 


Volume I Text 


who belong to Him. 
All power and glory are yours because the 
Kingdom is His. 
328 T(335) C 162 

T 7 I. 
The Defense of Conflict (Notes 733 7:65) 

T 7 11 . 
We once said that without projection there can be no anger, 
but it is also true that without projection there can be no love. 
Pro¬ 
jection is a fundamental law of the mind, and therefore one which 
ALWAYS operates. 
It is the law by which you create and were cre¬ 
ated. 
It is the law which unifies the Kingdom and keeps it in the 
mind of God. 
To the ego, the law is perceived as a way of getting 
RID of something it does NOT want. 
To the Holy Spirit, it is the 
fundamental law of sharing, by which you give what you value in 
order to keep it in your OWN minds. 


T 7 12 . 
Projection to the Holy Spirit is the law of extension. 
To the 
ego, it is the law of deprivation. 
It therefore produces abundance or 
scarcity, depending on how you choose to apply it. 
This choice IS up 
to you, but it is NOT up to you to decide whether or not you will 
UTILIZE projection. 
Every mind MUST project, because that is how 
it lives, and every mind IS life. 
The ego's use of projection must be 
fully understood before the INEVITABLE association between pro¬ 
jection and anger can be finally UNmade. 


T 713. 
The ego ALWAYS tries to preserve conflict. 
It is very ingen¬ 
ious in devising ways which SEEM to diminish conflict only because 
it does NOT want you to find it so intolerable that you will INSIST 
on giving it up. 
Therefore, it tries to persuade you that IT can free 
you OF conflict, lest you give IT up and free YOURSELF. 
The ego, 
using its own warped version of the laws of God, uses the power of 
the mind ONLY to defeat the mind's real purpose. 
It projects con¬ 
flict FROM your mind to OTHER minds, in an attempt to persuade 
you that you have gotten RID of it. 
This has a number of fallacies 
which may not be so apparent. 


328 Matthew 3:17 And suddenly a voice came from heaven, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased.” 


1-288 


298 



Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


T 714. 
Strictly speaking, conflict cannot BE projected, precisely BE¬ 
CAUSE it cannot be fully shared. 
Any attempt to keep PART of it 
and get rid of ANOTHER part does not really mean ANYTHING. 

Remember that a conflicted teacher is a poor teacher AND A POOR 
LEARNER. 
His lessons are confused, and their transfer value se¬ 
verely limited BY his confusion. 
T(336) C 163 

T 7 1 5. 
A second fallacy is the idea that you can GET RID of some¬ 
thing you do not want BY giving it away. 
GIVING it is how you 
KEEP it. 
The belief that by giving it OUT you have excluded from 
WITHIN is a complete distortion of the power of EXTENSION. 


T 716. 
That is why those who project from the ego are vigilant for 
their OWN safety. 
THEY ARE AFRAID THAT THEIR PROJEC¬ 
TIONS WILL RETURN AND HURT THEM. 
They DO believe they 
have blotted them out of their OWN minds, but they also believe 
they are trying to creep back INTO them. 
This is because their pro¬ 
jections have NOT left their minds, and this, in turn, forces them to 
engage in compulsive activity in order NOT to recognize this. 


T 7 I 7. 
You cannot perpetuate an illusion about another WITHOUT 
perpetuating it about yourself. 
There is no way out of this, because 
it is IMPOSSIBLE to fragment the mind. 
To fragment is to break into 
pieces, and mind CANNOT attack. 
The belief that it CAN, a fallacy 
which the ego ALWAYS makes, underlies its whole use of projec¬ 
tion. 
This is because it does not understand what the mind IS, and 
therefore does not understand what YOU are. 
Yet ITS existence IS 
dependent on your mind, because it is a BELIEF. 
The ego IS there¬ 
fore a confusion in identification, which never had a consistent 
model, and never developed consistently. 
It is the distorted product 
of the misapplication of the laws of God by distorted minds which 
are misusing their own power. 


T 718. 
DO NOT BE AFRAID OF THE EGO. 
It DOES depend on your 
mind, and as you made it by believing in it, so you can dispel it by 
withdrawing belief FROM it. 
Do NOT project the responsibility for 
your belief in it onto ANYONE else, or you will PRESERVE the be¬ 
lief. 
When you are willing to accept sole responsibility for the ego's 


299 


1-289 


Volume I Text 


existence YOURSELF, you will have laid aside all anger and all at¬ 
tack, because they COME from an attempt to PROJECT RESPONSI¬ 
BILITY FOR YOUR OWN ERRORS. 
But having ACCEPTED the er¬ 
ror T(337) C 164 as yours, DO NOT KEEP THEM. 
Give them over 
quickly to the Holy Spirit to be undone completely, so that ALL 
their effects will vanish from your minds and from the Sonship AS 
A WHOLE. 
He will teach you to perceive BEYOND belief, because 
truth IS beyond belief and His perception IS true. 


T 719. 
The ego can be completely forgotten at ANY time, because it 
was always a belief that is totally incredible. 
No-one can KEEP a be¬ 
lief he has judged to be unbelievable. 
The more you learn ABOUT 
the ego, the more you realize that it cannot BE believed. 
The in¬ 
credible cannot BE understood because it IS unbelievable. 
The utter 
meaninglessness of ALL perception which comes from the unbe¬ 
lievable MUST be apparent, but it is NOT beyond belief because it 
was made BY belief. 


T 7 1 to. 
The whole purpose of this course is to teach you that the ego 
is unbelievable and will forever BE unbelievable. 
You who made the 
ego by BELIEVING the unbelievable CANNOT make this judgment 
alone. 
By accepting the Atonement for YOURSELF, you are deciding 
AGAINST the belief that you can BE alone, thus dispelling the idea 
of separation and affirming your true identification with the whole 
Kingdom as literally PART OF YOU. 
This identification is as beyond 
doubt as it is beyond belief. 
Your wholeness HAS no limits, because 
its being is in Infinity. 


T 7 J. 
The Extension of the Kingdom (Notes 738 7:70) 

T 7 J l. 
Only you can limit your creative power, but God wills to re¬ 
lease it. 
He no more wills you to deprive yourselves of YOUR crea¬ 
tions than He wills to deprive Himself of His. 


T 7 J 2. 
Do not withhold your gifts to the Sonship, or you withhold 
yourself from God. 
Selfishness is of the ego but self-fullness is of the 
Soul because that is how He created it. 
The Holy Spirit is the part of 
the mind that lies between the ego and the Soul, mediating between 


1-290 


300 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


them ALWAYS IN FAVOR OF THE SOUL. 
To the ego this is partial¬ 
ity, and it therefore responds as if it were the part that is being sided 
AGAINST. 
T(338) c 165 To the Soul this is truth, because it knows its 
own fullness and cannot conceive of ANY part from which it is ex¬ 
cluded. 
The soul KNOWS that the consciousness of all its brothers is 
included in its own, as IT is included in God. 
The power of the 
whole Sonship AND OF ITS CREATOR is therefore its OWN full¬ 
ness, 329 rendering its Creation and its creating equally whole and 
equal in perfection. 


T 7 J 3. 
The ego cannot prevail 330 against a totality which includes 
God, and any totality MUST include God. 
Everything He created is 
given ALL His power because it is part of Him and shares His Being 
WITH Him. 
Creating is the OPPOSITE of loss, as blessing is the op¬ 
posite of sacrifice. 
Being MUST be extended. 
That is how it retains 
the knowledge of itSELF. 
The soul yearns to share ITS Being as ITS 
Creator did. 
Created BY sharing, its will is to create. 
It does NOT 
wish to CONTAIN God, but to EXTEND HIS BEING. 


T 7 J 4. 
The extension of God's Being is the Soul's only function. 
ITS 
fullness cannot be contained any more than can the fullness of its 
Creator. 
Fullness IS extension. 
The ego's whole thought system 
BLOCKS extension, and therefore blocks YOUR ONLY FUNCTION. 

It therefore blocks your joy and THIS is why you perceive your¬ 
selves as unfulfilled. 
Unless you create, you ARE unfulfilled. 
But 
God does NOT know unfulfillment, and therefore you MUST create. 

YOU may not know your own creations, but this can no more inter¬ 
fere with their reality than your unawareness of your Soul can inter¬ 
fere with its being. 


T 7 J 5. 
The Kingdom is forever extending, because it is in the Mind 
of God. 
YOU do not know your joy because you do not know your 
own self-fullness. 
Exclude ANY part of the Kingdom FROM your- 


329 Ephesians 3:19 To know the love of Christ which passes knowledge; that you may be filled with all 
the fullness of God. 


330 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 


301 


1-291 




Volume I Text 


self, and you are NOT whole. 
A split mind CANNOT perceive its 
fullness, and needs the miracle OF its wholeness to dawn upon it 
and heal it. 
This reawakens its wholeness IN it and restores it to the 
Kingdom because of its ACCEPTANCE of wholeness. 
The full ap¬ 
preciation of its self-fullness makes selfishness impossible, and ex¬ 
tension inevitable. 
T(339) c 66 That is why there is perfect peace in 
the Kingdom. 
Every Soul IS fulfilling its function, and ONLY com¬ 
plete fulfillment IS peace. 


T 7 J 6. 
Insanity APPEARS to add to reality, but no-one would claim 
that what it adds is true. 
Insanity is therefore the NONextension of 
truth, which blocks joy because it blocks Creation and therefore 
blocks self-FULFILLMENT. 
The unfulfilled MUST be depressed, 
because their self-fullness is UNKNOWN to them. 
Your creations 
are protected FOR you because the Floly Spirit, Who is in your 
minds, knows of them, and can bring them INTO your awareness 
whenever you will let Flim. 
They ARE there as part of your own be¬ 
ing, because YOUR fulfillment INCLUDES them. 
The creations of 
every Son of God are yours, because every creation belongs to eve¬ 
ryone, being created for the Sonship as a whole. 


T 7 J 7. 
You have not failed to add to the inheritance of the Sons of 
God, and thus have not failed to secure it for yourselves. 
If it was 
the will of God to give it to you. 
Fie gave it forever. 
If it was Fiis will 
that you have it forever. 
He gave you the means for keeping it, and 
YOU HAVE DONE SO. 
Disobeying God's will is meaningful only to 
the insane. 
In truth, it is impossible. 


T 7 J 8. 
Your self-fullness is as boundless as God's. 
Like His, it ex¬ 
tends forever and in perfect peace. 
Its radiance is so intense that it 
creates in perfect joy, and only the whole can be born of its whole¬ 
ness. 
Be confident that you have never lost your identity and the 
extension which maintains it in wholeness and peace. 
Miracles are 
AN EXPRESSION OF THIS CONFIDENCE. 
They are reflections 
both of your own proper identification WITH your brothers, and of 
your own awareness that YOUR identification IS maintained by ex¬ 
tension. 
The miracle is A LESSON IN TOTAL PERCEPTION. 
By in- 


1-292 


302 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 

eluding ANY part of totality in the lesson, you HAVE included the 
whole. 
T(340) C 167 

T 7 J 9. 
You have said that, when you write of the Kingdom and your 
own creations which belong to it, you are describing WHAT YOU 
DO NOT KNOW. 
This is true in a sense, but no more true than your 
failure to acknowledge the whole result of the ego's premises. 
The 
Kingdom is the result of premises, as much as this world is. 
You 
HAVE carried the ego's reasoning to its logical conclusion, which is 
TOTAL CONFUSION ABOUT EVERYTHING. 
But you do not 
really BELIEVE this, or you could not possibly maintain it. 
If you 
REALLY saw this result, you COULD not want it. 
The ONLY reason 
why you could possibly want ANY part of it is because YOU DO 
NOT SEE THE WHOLE OF IT. 


T 7 J 10. 
You therefore ARE willing to look at the ego's premises but 
NOT at their logical outcome. 
Is it not possible that you have done 
the same thing with the premises of God? Your creations ARE the 
logical outcome of His premises. 
HIS thinking has established them 
FOR you. 
They are therefore THERE, EXACTLY where they belong. 

They belong to your mind, as part of your identification with HIS. 

But your state of mind and your recognition of WHAT IS IN YOUR 
MIND depends, at any given moment, on what you believe ABOUT 
your mind. 
Whatever these beliefs may be, they are the premises 
which will determine WHAT YOU ACCEPT INTO YOUR MINDS. 


T 7 J 11. 
It is surely clear that you can both accept into your minds 
what is NOT really there, and DENY WHAT IS. 
Neither of these 
possibilities requires further elaboration, although both are clearly 
indefensible even if YOU elect to defend them. 
But the function 
which God Himself GAVE your minds through His you may DENY 
but you CANNOT prevent. 
They are the logical outcome of what 
you ARE. 
The ability to SEE a logical outcome depends on the 
WILLINGNESS TO SEE IT, but its TRUTH has nothing to do with 
your willingness at all. 
Truth is GOD's will. 
SHARE His Will, and 
you will share what He KNOWS. 
Deny His Will AS YOURS, and 
you are denying His Kingdom AND yours. 
T(341) C 168 


303 


1-293 


Volume I Text 


T 7 J12. 
The Holy Spirit will direct you ONLY so as to avoid all pain. 

The UNDOING of pain must OBVIOUSLY avoid this. 
No-one 
would surely OBJECT to this goal IF HE RECOGNIZED IT. 
The 
problem is NOT whether what He says is true, but whether or not 
you want to LISTEN to what He says. 


T 7 K. 
The Confusion of Strength and Weakness (Notes 746 
7:78) 

T 7 K 1. 
You no more recognize what is painful than you know what 
is joyful, and are, in fact, very apt to confuse them. 
The Holy Spirit's 
main function is to teach you to TELL THEM APART. 


T 7 K 2. 
However strange it may seem that this is necessary, it obvi¬ 
ously IS. 
The reason is equally obvious. 
What is joyful to you IS 
painful to the ego, and as long as you are in doubt about what YOU 
are, you WILL be confused about joy and pain. 
This confusion is the 
cause of the whole idea of sacrifice. 
Obey the Holy Spirit, and you 
WILL be giving up the ego, but you will be SACRIFICING nothing. 

On the contrary, you will be gaining EVERYTHING. 
But if you BE¬ 
LIEVED this there would BE no conflict. 
That is why you need to 
DEMONSTRATE THE OBVIOUS TO YOURSELF. 
It is NOT obvious 
to you. 


T 7 K 3. 
You REALLY believe that doing the opposite of God's will 
CAN be better for you. 
You also believe that it is POSSIBLE to do 
the opposite of God's will. 
Therefore, you believe that an impossible 
choice IS open to you, which is both very fearful and very desirable. 

But God WILLS. 
He does NOT wish. 
YOUR will is as powerful as 
His because it IS His. 
The ego's wishes do not mean anything, be¬ 
cause the ego wishes for the impossible. 
You CAN wish for the im¬ 
possible, but you can only WILL with God. 
This is the ego's weak¬ 
ness and YOUR strength. 
T(342) C 169 

T 7 K 4. 
The Holy Spirit ALWAYS sides with YOU and with your 
STRENGTH. 
As long as you avoid His guidance in any way, you 
WANT TO BE WEAK. 
But weakness IS frightening. 
What else, then, 
can this decision mean except that you WANT to be fearful? The 


1-294 


304 


Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


Holy Spirit NEVER asks for sacrifice, but the ego ALWAYS does. 

When you are confused about this VERY clear distinction in motiva¬ 
tion, it CAN only be due to projection. 
Projection of this kind IS a 
confusion in motivation, and given THIS confusion, TRUST be¬ 
comes impossible. 


T 7 K 5. 
No-one obeys gladly a guide he does not trust. 
But this does 
not mean that the GUIDE is untrustworthy. 
In this case, it ALWAYS 
means that the FOLLOWER IS. 
However, this, too, is merely a mat¬ 
ter of his own belief. 
Believing that HE can betray, he believes that 
everything can betray HIM. 
But this is ONLY because he has 
ELECTED TO FOLLOW FALSE GUIDANCE. 
Unable to follow 
THIS guidance WITHOUT fear, he associates fear WITH guidance, 
and refuses to follow ANY guidance at all. 
If the result of this deci¬ 
sion is confusion, this is hardly surprising. 


T 7 K 6. 
The Holy Spirit is perfectly trustworthy, as YOU are. 
God 
Himself trusts you and therefore your trustworthiness IS beyond 
question. 
It will always remain beyond question, however much 
you may question it. 
I trust MY choices ONLY because they ARE 
God's Will. 
We said before that YOU are the will of God. 
His will is 
not an idle wish, and your identification WITH His Will is not op¬ 
tional because it IS what you are. 
Sharing His will WITH me is not 
really open to choice at all, though it may SEEM to be. 
The whole 
separation lies in this fallacy. 
And the ONLY way out of the fallacy 
is to decide that YOU DO NOT HAVE TO DECIDE ANYTHING. 


T(343) C 170 

T 7 K 7. 
Everything has been given you by GOD'S decision. 
This IS 
His Will, and you can NOT undo it. 
Even the relinquishment of 
your false decision-making prerogative, which the ego guards so 
jealously, is not accomplished by your wish. 
It was accomplished 
FOR you by the Will of God, who has not left you comfortless. 
331 His 
Voice WILL teach you how to distinguish between pain and joy, and 
lead you out of the confusion YOU have made. 
There IS no confu- 


331 John 14:18 “I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you.” 


305 


1-295 



Volume I Text 


sion in the mind of a Son of God, whose will MUST be the will of 
the Father, because the Father's Will IS His Son. 


T 7 K 8. 
Miracles are IN ACCORD with the Will of God, whose will 
you do NOT know because you are confused about what YOU will. 

This MEANS that you are confused about what you are. 
If you ARE 
God's will and do NOT ACCEPT Elis will, you can ONLY be not 
accepting what you are. 
But if your joy IS what you are, you ARE 
denying joy. 
The miracle therefore is a lesson in WE1AT JOY IS. 
Be¬ 
ing a lesson in SE1ARING, it is a lesson in love, which IS joy. 
Every 
miracle is thus a lesson in Truth, and by OFFERING truth YOU are 
learning the difference between pain and joy. 


T 7 L. 
The State of Grace (Notes 752 7:84) 

T 7 L l. 
The Holy Spirit will ALWAYS guide you truly, because 
YOUR joy IS Elis. 
This is Elis will for everyone, because Ele speaks 
for the Kingdom of God which IS joy. 
Following Him 332 is therefore 
the easiest thing in the world, and the only thing which IS easy, be¬ 
cause it is NOT of the world and is therefore NATURAL. 
The world 
goes AGAINST your nature, because it is out of accord with God's 
laws. 
The world perceives orders of difficulty in EVERYTE1ING. 


This is because the ego perceives nothing as wholly desirable. 
By 
DEMONSTRATING to yourselves that THERE IS NO ORDER OF 
DIFFICULTY IN MIRACLES, you will convince yourselves that in 
your NATURAL state there IS no difficulty, because it is a state of 
Grace. 
T(344) c 171 

T 7 L 2. 
Grace is the natural state of every Son of God. 
When he is 
NOT in a state of grace he IS out of his natural environment, and 
does NOT function well. 
Everything he does becomes a strain, be¬ 
cause he was not created for the environment which he has made. 

He therefore CANNOT adapt to it, nor can he adapt IT to HIM. 

There is no point in trying. 
A Son of God is happy ONLY when he 
knows he is WITH God. 
That is the only environment in which he 
will not experience strain, because that is where he belongs. 
It is also 

332 Matthew 4:19 Then He said to them, “Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men.” 


1-296 


306 



Chapter 7 - The Consistency of the Kingdom 


the only environment that is worthy of him, because his own worth 
is beyond ANYTHING that he can make. 


T 7 L 3. 
Consider the Kingdom which YOU have made, and judge its 
worth fairly. 
Is it worthy to be a home for a Child of God? Does it 
protect his peace, and shine love upon him? Does it keep his heart 
untouched by fear, and allow him to give always without any sense 
of loss? Does it teach him that this giving IS his joy, and that God 
Himself thanks him for his giving? 

T 7 L 4. 
That is the only environment in which you can be happy. 
You 
cannot make it, any more than you can make yourselves. 
But it has 
been created for you, as you were created for it. 
God watches over 
His children and denies them nothing. 
But when they deny Him 
they do NOT know this, because THEY deny themselves every¬ 
thing. 
You who could give the love of God to everything you see 
and touch and remember are literally denying Heaven to your¬ 
selves. 
I call upon you again to remember that I have chosen you to 
teach the Kingdom TO the Kingdom. 
There are no exceptions to this 
lesson because the lack of exceptions IS the lesson. 


T 7 L 5. 
Every Son who returns to the Kingdom with this lesson in his 
heart has healed the Sonship and given thanks to God. 
Everyone 
who learns this lesson has become the perfect teacher, because he 
has learned it of the Holy Spirit, who wants to teach him everything 
He knows. 
When a mind has only light, it KNOWS only light. 
Its 
own radiance shines all around it, and T(345) C 172 extends out into 
the darkness of other minds, transforming them into majesty. 
The 
majesty of God is there, for YOU to recognize and appreciate and 
KNOW. 


T 7 L 6. 
Perceiving the majesty of God AS your brother is to accept 
your OWN inheritance. 
God gives only equally. 
If you recognize His 
gift to anyone ELSE, you have acknowledged what He has given 
YOU. 
Nothing is as easy to perceive as truth. 
This is the perception 
which is immediate, clear, and natural. 
You have trained yourselves 
NOT to see it, and this HAS been very difficult for you. 
OUT of your 


307 


1-297 


Volume I Text 


natural environment you may well ask, "what is truth?" 333 because 
truth IS the environment by which and for which you were created. 

You do not know yourselves because you do not know YOUR Crea¬ 
tor. 
You do not know YOUR creations, because you do not know 
your brothers who created them WITH you. 


T 7 L 7. 
We said before that only the whole Sonship is a worthy co¬ 
creator with God, because only the whole Sonship can create LIKE 
Him. 
Whenever you heal a brother by recognizing his worth, you 
are acknowledging HIS power to create and YOURS. 
HE cannot 
have lost what YOU recognize, and you MUST have the glory you 
see in HIM. 
He is a co-creator with God with YOU. 
Deny his crea¬ 
tive power and you are denying yours AND THAT OF GOD WHO 
CREATED YOU. 
You cannot deny part of the truth. 
You do not 
know your creations because you do not know their creator. 
You do 
not know yourselves because you do not know YOURS. 


T 7 L 8. 
Your creations cannot establish your reality, any more than 
YOU can establish God's. 
But you can KNOW both. 
Being is known 
by sharing. 
Because God shared His Being with you, you can know 
Him. 
But you must also know all He created to know what THEY 
have shared. 
Without your Father you will not know your father¬ 
hood. 
The Kingdom of God includes all His Sons and their children, 
who are like the Sons as they are like the Father. 
Know then the 
Sons of God, and you will know ALL Creation. 
T(346) C 173 334 


333 John 18:38 Pilate said to Him, “What is truth?” And when he had said this, he went out again to the 
Jews, and said to them, “I find no fault in Him at all. 


334 May 18 


1-298 


308 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 
T 8 A. 
Introduction (Notes 758 7:90) 

T 8 A1. 
You are hampered in your progress by your demands to 
know what you do not know. 
This is actually a way of hanging on 
to deprivation. 
You cannot reasonably object to following instruc¬ 
tions in a course FOR knowing, on the grounds that you do not 
know. 
The need for the course is implicit in your objection. 
Knowl¬ 
edge is not the motivation for learning this course. 
PEACE is. 
As the 
PREREQUISITE for knowledge, peace MUST be learned. 
This is 
ONLY because those who are in conflict are not peaceful, and peace 
is the CONDITION of knowledge because it is the condition of the 
Kingdom. 


T 8 A 2. 
Knowledge will be restored when YOU meet its conditions. 

This is not a bargain made by God, who made no bargains at all. 
It is 
merely the result of your misuse of His Laws on behalf of a will that 
was not His. 
Knowledge IS His Will. 
If you are OPPOSING His Will, 
how CAN you have knowledge? I have told you what knowledge 
OFFERS you, but it is clear that you do NOT regard this as wholly 
desirable. 
If you did, you would hardly be willing to throw it away 
so readily, when the ego asks for your allegiance. 


T 8 A 3. 
The distraction of the ego SEEMS to interfere with your learn¬ 
ing, but it HAS no power to distract unless you GIVE it the power. 

The ego's voice is an hallucination. 
You cannot expect the EGO to 
say "I am not real." Hallucinations ARE inaccurate perceptions of 
reality. 
But you are NOT asked to dispel them alone. 
You are merely 
asked to evaluate them in terms of their results TO YOU. 
If you DO 
NOT WANT THEM on the basis of LOSS OF PEACE, they will be 
removed from your mind FOR you. 
Every response to the ego is a 
call to war, and war DOES deprive you of peace. 


T 8 A 4. 
Yet in this war THERE IS NO OPPONENT. 
THIS is the re¬ 
interpretation of reality which you must make to secure peace, and 
the ONLY one you need ever make. 



309 


1-299 


Volume I Text 

T 8 B. 
The Direction of the Curriculum (Notes 760 7:92) 

T 8 B l. 
Those whom you PERCEIVE as opponents are PART of your 
peace, which YOU are giving up by attacking them. 
How can you 
have what YOU give up? You SHARE to have, but you do NOT give 
it up yourselves. 
T(347) C 174 When you GIVE UP peace, you are EX¬ 
CLUDING yourself FROM it. 
This is a condition which is so ALIEN 
to the Kingdom that you CANNOT understand the state which pre¬ 
vails WITHIN it. 


T 8 B 2. 
Your past learning MUST have taught you the wrong things, 
simply because it has not made you happy. 
On this basis alone, its 
value should be questioned. 
If learning aims at CHANGE, and that 
is ALWAYS its purpose, are you satisfied with the changes YOURS 
has brought you? Dissatisfaction with the learning outcome MUST 
be a sign of learning failure, because it means that you did NOT get 
what you WANT. 


T 8 B 3. 
The curriculum of the Atonement IS the opposite of the cur¬ 
riculum you have established for yourselves, but SO IS ITS OUT¬ 
COME. 
If the outcome of yours has made you unhappy, and if you 
WANT a different outcome, a change in the curriculum is obviously 
necessary. 
T(348) C 175 335 

T 8 B 4. 
The first change that MUST be introduced is a change in DI¬ 
RECTION. 
A meaningful curriculum CANNOT be inconsistent. 
If it 
is planned by two teachers, each believing in diametrically opposed 
ideas, it CANNOT be integrated. 
If it is carried out by these two 
teachers simultaneously, EACH ONE MERELY INTERFERES WITH 
THE OTHER. 
This leads to fluctuation, but NOT to change. 
The 
volatile HAVE no direction. 
They cannot choose one, because they 
CANNOT relinquish the others EVEN IF THE OTHERS DO NOT 
EXIST. 
Their conflicted curriculum teaches them that ALL directions 
exist, and gives them no RATIONALE for choice. 


T 8 B 5. 
The total senselessness of such a curriculum must be fully 
recognized before a real change in direction becomes possible. 
You 


May 23, 1966 


1-300 


310 




Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


CANNOT learn simultaneously from two teachers who are in TO¬ 
TAL DISAGREEMENT ABOUT EVERYTHING. 
Their joint curricu¬ 
lum presents an IMPOSSIBLE learning task. 
They are teaching you 
ENTIRELY different things in ENTIRELY different ways, which 
WOULD be possible except for the crucial fact that both are teaching 
you about YOURSELF. 
Your REALITY is unaffected by both. 
But if 
you LISTEN to both, your mind will split on WHAT YOUR REAL¬ 
ITY IS. 


T 8 C. 
The Rationale for Choice (Notes 762 7:94) 

T 8 c l. 
There IS a rationale for choice. 
Only ONE teacher KNOWS 
what your reality is. 
If learning that is the PURPOSE of the curricu¬ 
lum, you MUST learn it of Him. 
The ego does NOT KNOW WHAT 
IT IS TRYING TO TEACH. 
It is trying to teach you what you are 
WITHOUT KNOWING IT. 
The ego is expert ONLY in confusion. 
It 
does not understand ANYTHING ELSE. 
As a teacher, then, it is to¬ 
tally confused and TOTALLY CONFUSING. 


T 8 C 2. 
Even if you could disregard the Holy Spirit entirely, which is 
quite impossible, you could learn nothing from the ego, because the 
ego KNOWS nothing. 
Is there ANY possible reason for choosing a 
teacher such as this? Does the TOTAL disregard of ANYTHING it 
teaches make anything BUT sense? Is THIS the teacher to whom a 
Son of God should turn to find HIMSELF? The ego has never given 
you a sensible answer to anything. 
T(349) C 176 Simply on the 
grounds of your own experience with the ego's teaching, should not 
this alone disqualify it as your future teacher? 

T 8 C 3. 
But the ego has done more harm to your learning than this 
alone. 
Learning is joyful if it leads you along your natural path, and 
facilitates the development of WHAT YOU HAVE. 
But when you 
are taught AGAINST your nature, you will lose by your learning, 
because your learning will IMPRISON you. 
Your will is IN your na¬ 
ture, and therefore CANNOT go AGAINST it. 
The ego cannot teach 
you anything as long as your will is free, because you WILL NOT 
LISTEN TO IT. 
It is NOT your will to be imprisoned, BECAUSE 
your will is free. 



311 


1-301 



Volume I Text 


T 8 c 4. 
That is why the ego IS the denial of free will. 
It is NEVER 
God Who coerces you, because He SHARES His Will WITH you. 


His voice teaches ONLY His Will, but that is not the Holy Spirit's 
lesson, because that is what you ARE. 
The LESSON is that your will 
and God's CANNOT be out of accord because they ARE one. 
This is 
the UNdoing of EVERYTHING the ego tries to teach. 
It is not, then, 
only the DIRECTION (of the curriculum?) which must be uncon¬ 
flicted, but also the CONTENT. 


T 8 c 5. 
The ego wants to teach you that you want to OPPOSE God's 
Will. 
This unnatural lesson CANNOT be learned, but the ATTEMPT 
to learn it is a violation of your own freedom, and makes you 
AFRAID of your will BECAUSE it is free. 
The Holy Spirit opposes 
ANY imprisoning of the will of a Son of God, KNOWING that the 
will of the Son IS the Father's. 
He leads you steadily along the path 
of freedom, teaching you how to disregard, or look beyond EVERY¬ 
THING that would hold you back. 


T 8 c 6. 
We said before that the Holy Spirit teaches you the difference 
between pain and joy. 
That is the same as saying that He teaches 
you the difference between imprisonment and freedom. 
YOU 
CANNOT MAKE THIS DISTINCTION WITHOUT HIM. 
That is be¬ 
cause you have taught YOURSELF that imprisonment IS freedom. 

Believing them to be the same, how can you tell them apart? Can 
you ask the part of your mind that taught you to believe they ARE 
the same to teach you the DIFFERENCE? T(350) c 177 
T 8 C 7. 
The Holy Spirit's teaching takes only one direction, and has 
only one goal. 
His direction is freedom, and His goal is God. 
But He 
cannot conceive of God without YOU, because it was not God's Will 
to BE without you. 
When you have learned that your will IS God's, 
you could no more will to be without Him than He could will to be 
without YOU. 
This IS freedom and this IS joy. 
Deny YOURSELF 
this, and you ARE denying God His Kingdom, because He created 
you FOR this. 



1-302 


312 


Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


T 8 c 8. 
When we said, "all power and glory are yours 336 because the 
Kingdom is His," this is what we meant: The Will of God is without 
limit, and all power and glory lie within it. 
It is boundless in 
strength and in love and in peace. 
It has no boundaries because its 
extension is unlimited, and it encompasses all things because it 
CREATED all things. 
By CREATING all things, it made them PART 
OF ITSELF. 
YOU are the Will of God, because this is how you were 
created. 
Because your Creator creates only like Himself, you ARE 
like Him. 


T 8 C 9. 
You are part of Him who IS all power and glory, and are 
therefore as unlimited as He is. 
To what else EXCEPT all power and 
glory can the Holy Spirit appeal to restore God's Kingdom? His ap¬ 
peal, then, is merely to what the Kingdom is, and for its own ac¬ 
knowledgment of what it is. 
When you acknowledge THIS, you 
bring the acknowledgment automatically to everyone, because YOU 
HAVE ACKNOWLEDGED EVERYONE. 
By your recognition you 
awaken theirs, and through theirs YOURS is extended. 
Awakening 
runs easily and gladly through the Kingdom in answer to the call of 
God. 
This is the natural response of every Son of God to the Voice of 
His Creator, because it is the voice for HIS creations and for his own 
extension. 


T 8 D. 
The Holy Encounter (Notes 768 7:100) 

T 8 D l. 
Glory be to God in the highest, 337 and to you because He has 
so willed it. 
Ask and it shall be given you, 338 because it has already 
been given. 
Ask for light and learn that you are light. 
If you WANT 
understanding and enlightenment you will learn it, because your 
will to learn it is your decision to listen to the Teacher who knows of 
light and can therefore T(35l) C 78 TEACH IT TO YOU. 


336 Matthew 6:13 “And do not lead us into temptation, 

But deliver us from the evil one. 


For Yours is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever.” Amen. 


337 Luke 2:14 “Glory to God in the highest, And on earth peace, goodwill toward men!” 

338 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened 
unto you”: Luke 11:9 “And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; 
knock, and it shall be opened unto you.” 


313 


1-303 



Volume I Text 


T 8 D 2. 
There is no limit on your learning, because there is no limit 
on your MINDS. 
There is no limit on His will to teach, because He 
was created by unlimited Will in ORDER to teach. 
KNOWING His 
function perfectly. 
He wills to fulfill it perfectly, because that is His 
joy AND YOURS. 
To fulfill the Will of God perfectly is the only joy 
and peace that can be fully KNOWN, because it is the only function 
that can be FULLY EXPERIENCED. 
When this is accomplished, 
then, there IS no other experience. 
But the WISH for other experi¬ 
ence will block this, because God's Will CANNOT be forced upon 
you, being an experience of total WILLINGNESS. 


T 8 D 3. 
The Holy Spirit knows how to teach this, but YOU do not. 

That is why you need Him, and why God gave Him TO you. 
Only 
HIS teaching will release your will to God's, uniting it with His 
power and glory, and establishing them as yours. 
You will share 
them as He shares them, because this is the natural outcome of their 
being. 
The Will of the Father and of the Son are one together BY 
THEIR EXTENSION. 
Their extension is the RESULT of their One¬ 
ness, holding THEIR unity by extending their JOINT will. 


T 8 D 4. 
This is perfect creation by the perfectly created in union with 
the Perfect Creator. 
The Father MUST give fatherhood to His Sons, 
because His Own Fatherhood must be extended outward. 
You who 
belong in God have the holy function of extending His Fatherhood 
by placing no limits upon it. 
Let the Holy Spirit teach you HOW to 

do this, for you will know what it MEANS of God Himself. 
T(352) c 
179 

T 8 D 5. 
When you meet anyone, remember it is a holy encounter. 
As 
you see him, you will see yourself. 
As you treat him, you will treat 
yourself. 
As you think of him, you will think of yourself. 
Never for¬ 
get this, for in him you will find yourself or lose sight of yourself. 

Whenever two Sons of God meet they are given another chance at 
Salvation. 
Do not leave anyone without giving salvation TO him 


1-304 


314 


Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


and receiving it yourself. 
For I am always there WITH you, 339 in re¬ 
membrance of YOU. 


T 8 D 6. 
The goal of the curriculum, regardless of the teacher you 
choose, is KNOW THYSELF. 
There is nothing else to learn. 
Every¬ 
one is looking for himself and the power and glory he thinks he has 
lost. 
Whenever you are with anyone ELSE, you have another oppor¬ 
tunity to find them. 
Your power and glory are in HIM BECAUSE 
they are yours. 
The ego tries to find them in YOURSELF, because 
he 340 does not know where to look. 
But the Holy Spirit teaches you 
that if you look only at yourself you CANNOT find yourself because 
that is NOT what you are. 


T 8 D 7. 
Whenever you are with a brother you are learning what you 
are, because you are TEACHING what you are. 
He will respond ei¬ 
ther with pain or with joy, depending on which teacher YOU are 
following. 
HE will be imprisoned or released according to your de¬ 
cision, AND SO WILL YOU. 
341 Never forget your responsibility to 
him, because it is your responsibility to YOURSELF. 
Give him HIS 
place in the Kingdom, and you will have YOURS. 
The Kingdom 
CANNOT be found alone, and you who ARE the Kingdom cannot 
find YOURSELVES alone. 


T 8 D 8. 
To achieve the goal of the curriculum, then, you CANNOT 
listen to the ego. 
Its purpose is to DEFEAT ITS OWN GOAL. 
It does 
not know this, because it does not know anything. 
But YOU can 
know this, and you WILL know it if you are willing to look at what 
the ego has made of YOU. 
T(353) C 180 This IS your responsibility, be¬ 
cause once you have really done this you WILL accept the Atone¬ 
ment for yourself. 
What other choice could you make? 

T 8 D 9. 
Having made this choice, you will begin to learn and under¬ 
stand why you have believed that when you met someone else, you 

339 Matthew 28:20 “Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with 
you always, even to the end of the age.” Amen. 


340 Later versions have “it” rather than “he”, so does the Notes. 


’ 41 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 


315 


1-305 



Volume I Text 


have thought he WAS 342 someone else. 
And every holy encounter in 
which YOU enter fully will teach you THAT THIS IS NOT SO. 
You 
can encounter ONLY part of yourself, because you are part of God 
WHO IS EVERYTHING. 
His power and glory are everywhere, and 
you CANNOT be excluded from them. 
The ego teaches that your 
strength is in you ALONE. 
The Holy Spirit teaches that ALL 
strength is in God and THEREFORE in you. 


T 8 D to. 
God wills NO-ONE suffer. 
He does not will ANYONE to 
suffer for a wrong decision you have made, including YOURSELF. 

That is why He has given you the means for UNDOING it. 
Through 
His power and glory all your wrong decisions are undone COM¬ 
PLETELY, releasing you AND your brothers from EVERY IMPRIS¬ 
ONING THOUGHT ANY part of the Sonship has accepted. 
Wrong 
decisions HAVE no power BECAUSE they are not true. 
The impris¬ 
onment which they SEEM to produce is no more true than THEY 
are. 


T 8 D ll. 
Power and glory belong to God alone. 
So do YOU. 
God 
gives WHATEVER belongs to Him, because He gives OF HIMSELF, 
and EVERYTHING belongs to Him. 
Giving of YOUR self is the 
function He gave you. 
Fulfilling it perfectly will teach you what 
YOU have of HIM. 
And this will teach you what you are IN Him. 

You CANNOT be powerLESS to do this, because this IS your power. 

Glory is God's gift to you because that is what HE is. 
See this glory 
everywhere, to learn what YOU are. 
T(354) c 181 343 

T 8 E. 
The Light of the World (Notes 776 7:108) 

T 8 E l. 
If God's Will for you is complete peace and joy, unless you 
experience ONLY this you MUST be refusing to acknowledge His 
Will. 
His Will does not vacillate, being changeless forever. 
When 
you are not at peace, it can only be because you do not believe you 


342 Urtext manuscript has it typed “they WERE” crossed out and handwritten replacement is “he was ”. 

The Notes has it “they were.” 

343 May 31, 1966 


1-306 


316 




Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


are IN HIM. 
Yet He is all in all. 
344 His peace IS complete, and you 
MUST be included in it. 
His laws govern you because they govern 
EVERYTHING. 
You cannot exempt yourself from His laws, al¬ 
though you CAN disobey them. 
But if you do, and ONLY if you do, 
you WILL feel lonely and helpless, because you ARE denying your¬ 
self everything. 


T 8 E 2.1 am come as a light into the world 345 which DOES deny itself 
everything. 
It does this simply by dissociating itself FROM every¬ 
thing. 
It is therefore an illusion of isolation, MAINTAINED by fear 
of the same loneliness which IS its illusion. 
I have told you that I am 
with you always even to the end of the world. 
346 That is WHY I am 
the light of the world. 
347 If I am with you in the loneliness of the 
world, THE LONELINESS IS GONE. 
You CANNOT maintain the 
illusion of loneliness if you are NOT alone. 


T 8 E 3. 
My purpose, then, IS to overcome the world. 
348 1 do not attack 
it, but my light must dispel it because of WHAT IT IS. 
Light does 
not ATTACK darkness, but it DOES shine it away. 
If my light goes 
with you everywhere, YOU shine it away WITH ME. 
The light be¬ 
comes OURS, and you CANNOT abide in darkness, any more than 
darkness can abide anywhere you go. 
The remembrance of me IS 
the remembrance of yourself and of Him Who sent me to you. 
349 

T 8 E 4. 
You WERE in darkness until God's Will was done completely 
by ANY part of the Sonship. 
When it was, it was perfectly accom¬ 
plished by ALL. 
How else could it BE perfectly accomplished? My 


1 1 Corinthians 15:28 Now when all things are made subject to Him, then the Son Himself will also 
be subject to Him who put all things under Him, that God may be all in all. 


Ephesians 1:23 Which is His body, the fullness of Him who fills all in all. 


345 John 8:12 Again therefore Jesus spake unto them, saying, “I am the light of the world: he that 
followeth me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall have the light of life.” 

346 Matthew 28:20 “teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I commanded you: and lo, I am 
with you always, even unto the end of the world.” 

j47 John 8:12 Again therefore Jesus spake unto them, saying, “I am the light of the world: he that 
followeth me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall have the light of life.” Also John 9:5.12:46; 
Matthew 5:14 

,48 John 16:33 “These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye may have peace. 
In the world ye 
have tribulation: but be of good cheer; I have overcome the world.” 

j49 Luke 22:19 And He took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is My 
body which is given for you; do this in remembrance of Me.” 


317 


1-307 



Volume I Text 


mission was simply to UNITE the Will of the Sonship WITH the 
Will of the Father by being aware of the Father's Will myself. 
This is 
the awareness I came to give YOU, and YOUR problem in accepting 
it IS the problem of this world. 
Dispelling it is salvation, and in this 
sense I AM the salvation of the world. 
350 T(355) c 182 

T 8 E 5. 
The world MUST despise and reject me, 351 because the world 
IS the belief that love is impossible. 
YOUR reactions to me ARE the 
reactions of the world to God. 
If you will accept the fact that I am 
with you, you are DENYING the world and ACCEPTING GOD. 
My 
will IS His, and YOUR will to hear me IS the decision to hear His 
Voice and abide in His Will. 
As He sent me to you, so will I send 
you to others. 
But I will go to them WITH you, so we can teach them 
union and peace. 


T 8 E 6. 
Do you not think the world needs peace as much as you do? 
Do you not want to give it to the world as much as you want to re¬ 
ceive it? For unless you do, you will NOT receive it. 
If you will to 
have it of me, you MUST give it. 
Rehabilitation does not come from 
anyone ELSE. 
You can have GUIDANCE from without, but you 
must ACCEPT it from within. 
The guidance must become what 
YOU want, or else it will be meaningless to you. 
That is why reha¬ 
bilitation is a collaborative venture. 
I can tell you what to DO, but 
this will not really help you unless you collaborate by believing that 
I KNOW what to do. 
Only then will your MIND will to follow me. 


T 8 E 7. 
Without YOUR will, you cannot be rehabilitated. 
MOTIVA¬ 
TION TO BE HEALED is the crucial factor in rehabilitation. 
Without 
this, you are deciding AGAINST healing, and your veto of my will 
FOR you MAKES HEALING IMPOSSIBLE. 
If healing IS our joint 


350 John 8:12 Again therefore Jesus spake unto them, saying, “I am the light of the world: he that 
followeth me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall have the light of life.” Also John 11:25 Jesus 
said unto her, “I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth on me, though he die, yet shall he 
live” 

j:i1 Isaiah 53:3 He was despised, and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and 
as one from whom men hide their face he was despised; and we esteemed him not. 


John 15:18 “If the world hates you, you know that it hated Me before it hated you.” 


1-308 


318 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


will, unless our wills ARE joined you CANNOT be healed. 
This is 
obvious when you consider what healing is FOR. 


T 8 E 8. 
Healing is the way in which the separation is overcome. 

Separation is overcome by UNION. 
It CANNOT be overcome by 
separating. 
The WILL to unite must be unequivocal, or the will IT¬ 
SELF is separated or NOT WHOLE. 
Your will is the means by which 
you determine your own condition, because will is the MECHA¬ 
NISM OF DECISION. 
It is the power by which you separate or join, 
and experience pain or joy accordingly. 
My will cannot OVER¬ 
COME yours, because YOURS IS AS POWERFUL AS MINE. 
If it 
were not so, the Sons T(356) c 183 of God would be unequal. 


T 8 E 9. 
All things BECOME possible through our joint will. 
But my 
will alone will not help you. 
Your will is as free as mine, and God 
Himself would not go against it. 
I cannot will what God does not 
will. 
I CAN offer you my will to make yours invincible by this shar¬ 
ing, but I CANNOT oppose yours without competing with it and 
thereby violating God's Will for you. 
Nothing God created can op¬ 
pose your will, as nothing God created can oppose His. 
God GAVE 
your will its power, which I can only acknowledge in honor of His. 


T 8 E 10. 
If you want to be LIKE me, I will help you, knowing that we 
ARE alike. 
If you want to be DIFFERENT, I will wait until you 
change your mind. 
I can TEACH you, but only you can choose to 
LISTEN to my teaching. 
How else can it be, if God's Kingdom IS 
freedom? Freedom cannot be learned by tyranny of ANY kind, and 
the perfect equality of ALL God's Sons cannot be recognized 
through the dominion of one will over another. 
God's Sons are 
equal in will, all being the Will of their Father. 
This is the ONLY les¬ 
son I can teach, knowing that it is true. 


T 8 E 11. 
When your will is NOT mine, it is not Our Father's. 
This 
means that you have imprisoned YOURS, and have not LET it be 
free. 
Of yourselves you can do nothing, 352 because of yourselves you 


352 John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do 
nothing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like 
manner.” 


319 


1-309 



Volume I Text 


ARE nothing. 
I am nothing without the Father, and YOU are noth¬ 
ing without me because by DENYING the Father you deny YOUR¬ 
SELF. 
I will ALWAYS remember you, and in MY remembrance OF 
you lies your remembrance of YOURSELF. 
In our remembrance of 
EACH OTHER lies our remembrance of God. 
And in this remem¬ 
brance lies your freedom, because your freedom is in Him. 
353 
T 8 E 12. 
Join then with me in praise of Him AND you whom He cre¬ 
ated. 
This is our gift of gratitude to Him, which He will share with 
ALL His Creations, to whom He gives equally whatever is accept¬ 
able to Him. 
BECAUSE it is acceptable to Him, it is the gift of free¬ 
dom, which IS His Will for all His Sons. 
By OFFERING freedom you 
will be free, because T(357) C 184 freedom is the only gift which you 
can offer to God's Sons, being an acknowledgment of what they are 
and what HE is. 


T 8 E 13. 
Freedom is creation because it is love. 
What you seek to im¬ 
prison you do NOT love. 
Therefore, when you seek to imprison 
ANYONE, including YOURSELF, you do not love him and you 
cannot identify with him. 
When you imprison yourself, you are los¬ 
ing sight of your true identification with me and with the Father. 

Your identification IS with the Father and with the Son. 
It CANNOT 
be with one and not the other. 
If you are part of one, you MUST be 
part of the other because they ARE One. 


T 8 E 14. 
The Holy Trinity is holy BECAUSE It is One. 
If you exclude 
YOURSELF from this union, you are perceiving the Holy Trinity as 
separated. 
You MUST be included in It, because It IS everything. 

Unless you take your place in It and fulfill your function AS part of 
It, It is as bereft as YOU are. 
No part of It can be imprisoned if Its 
Truth is to be known. 


T 8 E 15. 
Can you be separated from your identification and be at 
peace? Dissociation is NOT a solution; it is a DELUSION. 
The delu- 


John 5:30 “I can of Myself do nothing. 
As I hear, I judge; and My judgment is righteous, because I do 
not seek My own will but the will of the Father who sent Me.” 

353 Luke 22:19 And He took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, “This is My 
body which is given for you; do this in remembrance of Me.” 


1-310 


320 




Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


sional believe that truth will ASSAIL them, and so they DO NOT 
SEE IT because they prefer the delusion. 
Judging truth as something 
they do NOT want, they perceive deception and block knowledge. 

Help them by offering them YOUR unified will on their behalf, as I 
am offering you mine on YOURS. 
Alone we can do nothing, but 
TOGETHER our wills fuse into something whose power is far be¬ 
yond the power of its separate parts. 


T 8 E 16. 
By NOT BEING SEPARATE, the Will of God is established 
IN ours and AS ours. 
This will is invincible BECAUSE it is undi¬ 
vided. 
The UNDIVIDED will of the Sonship is the perfect creator, 
being wholly in the likeness of God, 354 Whose Will it IS. 
YOU cannot 
be exempt from it, if you are to understand what it is and what YOU 
are. 
By separating your will from mine, you ARE exempting your¬ 
self from the Will of God which IS yourself. 


T 8 E 17. 
But to heal is still to make whole. 
Therefore to heal is to 
UNITE with those who are LIKE you, because perceiving this like¬ 
ness IS to T(358) c 185 recognize the Father. 
If YOUR perfection is in 
Him and ONLY in Him, how can you KNOW it WITHOUT recog¬ 
nizing Him? The recognition of God is the recognition of yourself. 

There IS no separation of God and His Creation. 
You will learn this 
as you learn that there is no separation of YOUR will and mine. 


T 8 E 18. 
Let the love of God shine upon you by your acceptance of 
me. 
MY reality is yours and His. 
By joining YOUR will with mine, 
you are signifying your awareness that the Will of God is One. 
His 
Oneness and ours are not separate, because His Oneness ENCOM¬ 
PASSES ours. 
To join WITH me is to restore His power TO you BE¬ 
CAUSE we are sharing it. 
I offer you only the recognition of His 
power in you, but in that lies ALL truth. 
As WE unite, we unite with 
Him. 
Glory be to the union of God and His Holy Sons, because all 
glory lies IN them because they ARE united. 



~’ 54 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



321 


1-311 



Volume I Text 


T 8 E 19. 
The miracles WE do bear witness to the Will of the Father for 
His Son, and to our joy in uniting WITH His Will FOR us. 
When you 
unite with me, you are uniting WITHOUT the ego, because I have 
renounced the ego in myself, and therefore CANNOT unite with 
yours. 
OUR union is therefore the way to renounce the ego in 
YOURSEFVES . 
The truth in both of us is BEYOND the ego. 
By will¬ 
ing that, you HAVE gone beyond it toward truth. 


T 8 E 20. 
Our success in transcending the ego is guaranteed by God, 
and I can share my perfect confidence IN His Promise because I 
know He gave me this confidence for both of us and ALL of us. 
I 
bring His Peace back to all His Children, because I received it of 
Him for us all. 
Nothing can prevail against our united wills, because 
nothing can prevail against God's. 
Would ye know the Will of God 
for YOU? Ask it of me, who knows 355 it for you, and you will find it. 


I will deny YOU nothing, as God denies ME nothing. 


T 8 E 21. 
Ours is simply the journey back to God Who is our home. 

Whenever fear intrudes anywhere along the road to peace, it is 
ALWAYS because the ego has attempted to JOIN the journey with 
us AND CANNOT DO SO. 
Sensing defeat and angered by it, it re¬ 
gards itself as rejected and becomes T(359) c 186 retaliative. 
You are 
invulnerable to its retaliation BECAUSE I AM WITH YOU. 
On this 
journey, you have chosen me as your companion INSTEAD of your 
ego. 
Do not try to hold on to both, or you will try to go in different 
directions and will lose the way. 


T 8 E 22. 
The ego's way is not mine, but it is also NOT YOURS. 
The 
Holy Spirit has one direction for ALL minds, and the one He taught 
me IS yours. 
Let us not lose sight of His direction through illusions, 
for ONLY illusions of another direction can obscure the one for 
which God's Voice speaks in all of us. 
Never accord the ego the 
power to interfere with the journey, because it HAS none, and the 


355 Urtext manuscript has it typed “know”, it should be “knows” as it is in the HLC to be grammatically 
correct. 
The Notes , however, also has it as “know.” 


1-312 


322 





Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


journey is the way to what is TRUE. 
Leave ALL deception behind, 
and reach beyond all attempts of the ego to hold you back. 


T 8 E 23.1 DO go before you, because I AM beyond the ego. 
Reach 
therefore for my hand because you WANT to transcend the ego. 
My 
will, will NEVER be wanting, and if you want to share it YOU 
WILL. 
I give it willingly and gladly, because I need YOU as much as 
you need ME. 


T 8 F. 
The Power of Joint Decision (Notes 789 7:121) 

T 8 F1. 
WE are the joint will of the Sonship, whose wholeness is for 
all. 
We begin the journey back by setting out TOGETHER, and 
gather in our brothers as we CONTINUE together. 


T 8 F 2. 
Every gain in our strength is offered to all, so they, too, can 
lay aside their weakness and add their strength to us. 
God's wel¬ 
come waits for us all, and He will welcome us as I am welcoming 
YOU. 
Forget not the Kingdom of God for anything the world has to 
offer. 
The world can ADD nothing to the power and the glory of 
God and His Holy Sons, but it CAN blind the Sons to the Father if 
they behold it. 
You cannot behold the 356 world and know God. 
Only 
one is true. 


T 8 F 3.1 am come to tell you that the choice of which is true is not 
yours. 
If it were, you would have destroyed yourselves. 
But God 
did not will the destruction of His Creations, having created them 
for eternity. 
His Will has saved you, not from yourselves, but from 
your illusions of yourselves. 
He has saved you FOR yourselves. 
Let 
us glorify Him Whom the world denies, for over His Kingdom 357 it 
has no power. 
T(360) C 187 358 

T 8 F 4. 
No-one created by God can find joy in anything except the 
eternal. 
That is not because he is DEPRIVED of anything else, but 


356 Urtext manuscript has it “and” ... 
HLC has it “the” which appears correct. 
The passage has not been 
located in the Notes. 


337 John 18:36 Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. 
If My kingdom were of this world, 
My servants would fight, so that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now My kingdom is not from 
here.” 

358 June 6, 1966. 



323 


1-313 




Volume I Text 


because nothing else is WORTHY of him. 
What God AND His Sons 
create IS eternal, and in this and this only is their joy. 
Listen to the 
story of the prodigal son , 359 and learn what God's treasure is and 
YOURS : 360 

T 8 F 5. 
This son of a loving father left his home and thought he 
squandered everything for nothing of any value, though he did not 
know its worthlessness at the time. 
He was ashamed to return to his 
father, because he thought he had hurt him. 
But when he came 
home the father welcomed him with joy, because only the son him¬ 
self WAS his father's treasure. 
HE WANTED NOTHING ELSE. 


T 8 F 6. 
God wants only His Son, because His Son is His only treas¬ 
ure. 
You want your creations, as He wants His. 
Your creations are 
your gift to the Holy Trinity, created in gratitude for YOUR creation. 

They do not leave you, any more than you have left YOUR Creator. 



359 Luke 15:11-32 Then He said: “A certain man had two sons. 
And the younger of them said to his 
father, “Father, give me the portion of goods that falls to me.' So he divided to them his livelihood. 
And 
not many days after, the younger son gathered all together, journeyed to a far country, and there wasted 
his possessions with prodigal living. 
But when he had spent all, there arose a severe famine in that land, 
and he began to be in want. 
Then he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country, and he sent 
him into his fields to feed swine. 
And he would gladly have filled his stomach with the pods that the 
swine ate, and no one gave him anything. 


“But when he came to himself, he said, “How many of my father’s hired servants have bread enough 
and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and will say to him, “Father, I 
have sinned against heaven and before you, and I am no longer worthy to be called your son. 
Make me 
like one of your hired servants.”' 

“And he arose and came to his father. 
But when he was still a great way off, his father saw him and had 
compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. 
And the son said to him, “Father, I have 
sinned against heaven and in your sight, and am no longer worthy to be called your son.' 

“But the father said to his servants, “Bring out the best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his 
hand and sandals on his feet. 
And bring the fatted calf here and kill it, and let us eat and be merry; for 
this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' And they began to be merry. 


“Now his older son was in the field. 
And as he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and 
dancing. 
So he called one of the servants and asked what these things meant. 
And he said to him, “Your 
brother has come, and because he has received him safe and sound, your father has killed the fatted 
calf.' 

“But he was angry and would not go in. 
Therefore his father came out and pleaded with him. 
So he 
answered and said to his father, “Lo, these many years I have been serving you; I never transgressed 
your commandment at any time; and yet you never gave me a young goat, that I might make merry with 
my friends. 
But as soon as this son of yours came, who has devoured your livelihood with harlots, you 
killed the fatted calf for him.' 

“And he said to him, “Son, you are always with me, and all that I have is yours. 
It was right that we 
should make merry and be glad, for your brother was dead and is alive again, and was lost and is 
found.”' 

360 The Urtext manuscript has a paragraph break here, but no other version does. 



1-314 


324 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


But they EXTEND your creation, as God extended Himself to YOU. 

Can the Creations of God Himself take joy in what is not real? And 
what IS real except the Creations of God and those which are cre¬ 
ated like His? YOUR creations love you as your Soul loves your Fa¬ 
ther FOR THE GIFT OF CREATION. 
There IS no other gift that is 
eternal, and therefore THERE IS NO OTHER GIFT THAT IS TRUE. 


T 8 F 7. 
How, then, can you accept anything else, or GIVE anything 
else, and expect joy in return? And what else BUT joy would you 
want? You made neither yourself nor your function. 
YOU have 
made only the DECISION to be unworthy of both. 
But you COULD 
not make YOURSELF unworthy because YOU ARE THE TREAS¬ 
URE OF GOD. 
What HE values IS valuable. 
There CAN be no ques¬ 
tion of its worth, because its value lies in God's sharing Himself 
with it and ESTABLISHING ITS T(36l) c 188 VALUE FOREVER. 

YOUR function is to ADD to God's treasure by creating YOURS. 
His 
will TO you is His Will FOR you. 
He would not withhold creation 
from you, because HIS joy is in it. 


T 8 F 8. 
You CANNOT find joy EXCEPT as He does. 
HIS joy lay in 
creating YOU, and He extends His Fatherhood to you so that you 
can extend yourself AS HE DID. 
You do not understand this be¬ 
cause you do not understand Him. 
No one who does not know his 
function can understand it. 
And no one CAN know his function 
unless he knows who he IS. 
Creation is the Will of God. 
His Will 
created you TO CREATE. 
Your will was not created separate from 
His, and so it wills as HE wills. 


T 8 F 9. 
An unwilling will does not mean anything, because it is a 
contradiction in terms which actually leaves nothing. 
You can make 
yourself powerless only in a way that has NO MEANING AT ALL. 

When you THINK you are unwilling to will with God, YOU ARE 
NOT THINKING. 
God's will IS thought. 
It cannot be contradicted 
BY thought. 
God does not contradict HIMSELF. 
And His Sons, who 
are like Him, cannot contradict themselves OR Him. 
But their 
thought is so powerful that they can even imprison the mind of 
God's Son IF THEY SO CHOOSE. 
This choice DOES make the Son's 


325 


1-315 


Volume I Text 


function unknown TO HIM, but never to his Creator. 
And BE¬ 
CAUSE it is not unknown to his Creator, it is forever knowable to 
him. 


T 8 F 10. 
There is no question but one you should ever ask of yourself: 
"Do I want to know my Father's Will for me?" HE will not hide it. 

He has revealed it to me because I asked it of Him, and learned of 
what He had already given. 
Our function is to function together, 
because apart from each other we cannot function at all. 
The whole 
power of God's Son lies in all of us, but not in any of us alone. 
T(362) 
C 189 God would not have us be alone because HE does not will to 
be alone. 
That is why He created His Son and gave him the power to 
create with Him. 
Our creations are as holy as we are, and we are the 
Sons of God Himself, and therefore as holy as He is. 
Through our 
creations we extend our Love, and thus increase the joy of the Holy 
Trinity. 
You do not understand this for a very simple reason. 
You 
who are God's own treasure do not regard yourselves as valuable. 

Given this belief YOU CANNOT UNDERSTAND ANYTHING. 


T 8 F ll. 
I share with God the knowledge of the value HE puts upon 
you. 
My devotion to you is of Him, being born of my knowledge of 
myself AND Him. 
We cannot BE separated. 
Whom God has joined 
CANNOT be separated , 361 and God has joined all His Sons WITH 
HIMSELF. 
Can you be separated from your life and your being? The 
journey to God is merely the reawakening of the knowledge of 
where you are always, and what you are forever. 
It is a journey 
without distance, to a goal that has never changed. 


T 8 F12. 
Truth can only be EXPERIENCED. 
It cannot be described 
and it cannot be explained. 
I can make you aware of the CONDI¬ 
TIONS of truth, but the experience is of God. 
Together we can meet 
its conditions, but truth will dawn upon you of itself. 
What God has 
willed for you IS yours. 
He has given His Will to His treasure. 



361 Mark 10:9 “What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.” 

Matthew 19:6 “So that they are no more twain, but one flesh. 
What therefore God hath joined together, 
let not man put asunder.” 


1-316 


326 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


whose treasure It is. 
Your heart lies where your treasure is, 362 as His 
does. 
You who are beloved of God are wholly blessed. 
Learn this of 

me, and free the Holy Will of all those who are as blessed as you are. 

T(363) C 190 

T 8 G. 
Communication and the Ego-Body Equation (Notes 
798 7:130) 

T 8 G l. 
Attack is ALWAYS physical. 
When attack in ANY form en¬ 
ters your mind, you are EQUATING YOURSELF WITH A BODY. 

This is the ego's INTERPRETATION of the body. 
You do not have 
to ATTACK physically to accept this interpretation; you ARE ac¬ 
cepting it simply by the belief that attack can GET YOU SOME¬ 
THING YOU WANT. 
If you did NOT believe this, the IDEA of at¬ 
tack would have no appeal to you. 


T 8 G 2. 
When you equate yourself with a body, you will ALWAYS 
experience depression. 
When a Child of God thinks of himself in 
this way, he is belittling himself and seeing his brothers as similarly 
belittled. 
Since he can find himself ONLY in them, he has cut him¬ 
self off from salvation. 
Remember that the Holy Spirit interprets the 
body ONLY as a means of communication. 
Being the communica¬ 
tion link between God and His separated Sons, He interprets every¬ 
thing YOU have in the light of what HE is. 


T 8 G 3. 
The ego SEPARATES through the body. 
The Holy Spirit 
reaches THROUGH it to others. 
You do not perceive your brothers 
as the Holy Spirit does because you do not interpret their bodies 
AND YOURS solely as a means of JOINING THEIR MINDS and 
uniting them with yours and mine. 
This interpretation of the body 
will change your mind entirely about its value. 
Of itself it has 
NONE. 
If you use it for attack it is harmful to you. 
But if you use it 
ONLY to reach the minds of those who believe they ARE bodies and 
teach them THROUGH the body that THIS IS NOT SO, you will be¬ 
gin to understand the power of the mind that is in both of you. 
If 
you use the body for this, and ONLY for this, you CANNOT use it 

362 Matthew 6:21 “For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.” 


327 


1-317 




Volume I Text 


for attack. 
In the service of uniting, it becomes a beautiful lesson in 
communion, which has value until communion IS. 
T(364) C 191 
T 8 G 4. 
This is God's way of making unlimited what YOU have lim¬ 
ited. 
His Voice does not see the body as YOU do, because He knows 
the ONLY reality that ANYTHING can have is the service it can 
render God on behalf of the function HE has given. 
Communication 
ENDS separation. 
Attack PROMOTES it. 
The body is ugly or beauti¬ 
ful, savage or holy, helpful or harmful, according to the use to 
which it is put. 
And in the body of another you will see the use to 
which you put YOURS. 


T 8 G 5. 
If the body becomes for you a means which you give to the 
Holy Spirit to use on behalf of the union of the Sonship, you will not 
see ANYTHING physical except as WHAT IT IS. 
Use it for truth, 
and you will see it truly. 
MISuse it and you WILL misunderstand it, 
because you have already done so BY misusing it. 
Interpret ANY¬ 
THING apart from the Holy Spirit, and you will mistrust it. 
This 
will lead you to hatred and attack and LOSS OF PEACE. 


T 8 G 6. 
But ALL loss comes only from your own misunderstanding. 

Loss of ANY kind is impossible. 
When you look upon a brother as a 
physical entity, HIS power and glory are lost to you and SO ARE 
YOURS. 
You HAVE attacked him, and you MUST have attacked 
yourself first. 
Do not see him this way for your OWN salvation, 
which MUST bring him his. 
Do not ALLOW him to belittle himself 
in YOUR mind, but give him freedom from his belief in littleness, 
and escape from YOURS. 
As part of YOU, HE is holy. 
As part of 
ME, YOU are. 
To communicate with part of God Himself is to reach 
beyond the Kingdom to its Creator, through His Voice which He has 
established as part of YOU. 
T(365) c 192 

T 8 G 7. 
Rejoice, then, that of yourselves you can do nothing. 
363 You 
are not OF yourselves. 
And He of Whom you ARE has willed your 
power and glory FOR you, with which you can perfectly accomplish 


’ John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do 
nothing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like 
manner.” 


1-318 


328 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


His holy Will for you when you so will it yourself. 
He has not with¬ 
drawn His gifts from YOU, but YOU have withdrawn them from 
Him. 
Let no Son of God remain hidden for His Name's sake, be¬ 
cause His Name is YOURS. 


T 8 G 8. 
Remember that the Bible says, "The word (or thought) was 
made flesh." 364 Strictly speaking, this is impossible, since it seems to 
involve the translation of one order of reality into another. 
Different 
orders of reality merely SEEM to exist, just as different orders of 
miracles do. 
Thought cannot be MADE into flesh except by belief, 
because thought is NOT physical. 
But thought IS communication, 
for which the body can be used. 
This is the only NATURAL use to 
which it can be put. 
To use the body UNnaturally is to lose sight of 
the Holy Spirit's purpose, and thus to confuse the goal of His cur¬ 
riculum. 


T 8 G 9. 
There is nothing so frustrating to a learner as to place him in 
a curriculum which he cannot learn. 
His sense of adequacy suffers, 
and he MUST become depressed. 
Being faced with an impossible 
learning situation, REGARDLESS of why it is impossible, is the most 
depressing thing in the world. 
In fact, it is ultimately WHY the 
world is depressing. 
The Holy Spirit's curriculum is NEVER de¬ 
pressing because it is a curriculum in joy. 
Whenever the reaction to 
learning is depression, it is only because the goal of the curriculum 
has been lost sight of. 


T 8 G 10. 
In the world, not even the body is perceived as whole. 
Its 
purpose is seen as fragmented into many functions which bear little 
or no relationship to each other, so that it appears to be ruled by 
chaos. 
T(366) c 193 Guided by the ego, it IS. 
Guided by the Holy 
Spirit, it is NOT. 
It becomes ONLY a means by which the part of the 
mind which you have separated from your Soul can reach beyond 
its distortions and RETURN to the Soul. 
The ego's temple thus be¬ 
comes the temple of the Holy Spirit, where devotion to Him replaces 


’" 4 John 1 : 14 And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, glory as of 
the only begotten from the Father), full of grace and truth. 



329 


1-319 




Volume I Text 


devotion to the ego. 
In this sense the body DOES become a temple 
to God, 365 because His Voice abides in it by directing the use TO 
WHICH YOU PUT IT. 


T 8 G 11. 
Healing is the result of using the body SOLELY for commu¬ 
nication. 
Since this IS natural, it heals by making whole, which is 
also natural. 
ALL mind is whole, and the belief that part of it is 
physical or NOT MIND is a fragmented (or sick) interpretation. 

Mind CANNOT be made physical, but it CAN be made manifest 
THROUGH the physical if it uses the body to GO BEYOND itself. 


By reaching OUT, the mind EXTENDS itself. 
It does not STOP at the 
body, for if it does it is blocked in its purpose. 
A mind which has 
been blocked has allowed itself to be vulnerable to attack, because it 
has TURNED AGAINST ITSELF. 


T 8 G 12. 
The removal of blocks, then, is the ONLY way to guarantee 
help and healing. 
Help and healing are the normal expressions of a 
mind which is working THROUGH the body but not IN it. 
If the 
mind believes the body is its GOAL, it WILL distort its perception 
OF the body, and by blocking its own extension BEYOND it will 
INDUCE illness by FOSTERING SEPARATION. 
Perceiving the 
body AS A SEPARATE ENTITY cannot BUT foster illness, because it 
is not true. 
A medium of communication WILL lose its usefulness if 
it is used for anything else. 
T(367) C 194 

T 8 G 13. 
To use a medium of communication as a medium of AT¬ 
TACK is an obvious confusion in purpose. 
To communicate is to 
join and to attack is to separate. 
How can you do both simultane¬ 
ously WITH THE SAME THING, and NOT suffer? Perception of the 
body can be unified only by ONE PURPOSE. 
This releases the mind 
from the temptation to see it in many lights, and gives it over EN¬ 
TIRELY to the One Light in which it can be really understood at all. 



365 1 Corinthians 3:16 Do you not know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God 
dwells in you? 

1 Corinthians 6:19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, 
whom you have from God, and you are not your own? 


1-320 


330 





Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


T 8 G 14. 
To confuse a learning device with a curriculum GOAL is a 
fundamental confusion. 
Learning can hardly be meaningfully ar¬ 
rested at its own aids, and hope to understand them OR its real 
purpose. 
Learning must lead BEYOND the body to the re¬ 
establishment of the power of the mind IN it. 
This can be accom¬ 
plished ONLY if the mind EXTENDS to other minds, and does not 
ARREST ITSELF in its extension. 
The arrest of the mind's extension 
is the cause of all illness, because ONLY EXTENSION IS THE 
MIND's FUNCTION. 
Block this, and you have blocked health be¬ 
cause you have BLOCKED THE MIND's JOY. 


T 8 G 15. 
The opposite of joy is depression. 
When your learning pro¬ 
motes depression INSTEAD of joy, you CANNOT be listening to 
God's joyous teacher, and you MUST be learning amiss. 
To see a 
body as anything EXCEPT a means of pure extension is to limit your 
mind and HURT YOURSELF. 
Health is therefore nothing more than 
united purpose. 
If the body is brought under the purpose of the 
mind, it becomes whole because the mind's purpose IS one. 


T 8 G 16. 
Attack can only be an assumed goal of the body, but the 
body APART from the mind HAS NO PURPOSE AT ALL. 
You are 
NOT limited by the body, and thought CANNOT be made flesh. 
366 
But mind can be manifested through the body if it goes beyond it 
and DOES NOT INTERPRET IT AS LIMITATION. 
Whenever you 
see another as limited TO or BY the body, you are imposing this 
limit ON YOURSELF. 
Are you willing to ACCEPT this, when your 

whole purpose for learning should be to escape FROM limitations? 
T(368) C 195 

T 8 G 17. 
To conceive of the body as a means of attack of any kind, 
and to entertain even the possibility that joy could POSSIBLY result, 
is a clear-cut indication of a poor learner. 
He has accepted a learning 
goal in obvious contradiction to the unified purpose of the curricu¬ 
lum, and is interfering with his ability to accept it AS HIS OWN. 



366 John 1:14 And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory, the glory as of 
the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. 



331 


1-321 



Volume I Text 


T 8 G 18. 
Joy is unified purpose, and unified purpose is ONLY God's. 

When yours is unified, it IS His. 
Interfere with His purpose, and 
YOU NEED SALVATION. 
You have condemned yourself, but con¬ 
demnation is not of God. 
Therefore, it is not true. 
No more are any 
of the RESULTS of your condemnation. 
When you see a brother as a 
body, you are condemning him BECAUSE you have condemned 
yourself. 
But if ALL condemnation is unreal, and it MUST be unreal 
because it is a form of attack, then it can HAVE no results. 


T 8 G 19. 
Do not allow yourselves to suffer from the results of what is 
not true. 
Free your minds from the belief that this is possible. 
In its 
complete impossibility, and your full awareness OF its complete 
impossibility, lies your only hope for release. 
But what other hope 
would you want? Freedom from illusions lies only in not BELIEV¬ 
ING them. 
THERE IS NO 367 ATTACK, but there IS unlimited com¬ 
munication and therefore unlimited power and wholeness. 
The 
power of wholeness is EXTENSION. 
Do not arrest your thought in 
this world, and you will open your mind to Creation in God. 
T(369) C 

19 6 368 

T 8 H. 
The Body as Means or End (Notes 813 7:145) 

T 8 H l. 
Attitudes toward the body are attitudes toward ATTACK. 

The ego's definitions of ANYTHING are childish, and are ALWAYS 
based on what it believes a thing is FOR. 
This is because it is incapa¬ 
ble of true generalizations, and equates what it sees with the func¬ 
tion IT ascribes to it. 
It does NOT equate it with what it IS. 
To the 
ego, the body IS TO ATTACK WITH. 
Equating YOU with the body, 
it teaches that YOU are to attack with, because THIS IS WHAT IT 
BELIEVES. 
The body, then, is not the source of its own health. 
Its 
condition lies solely in your interpretation of its function. 


T 8 H 2. 
The reason why definitions by function are inferior is merely 
because they may well be inaccurate. 
Functions are part of being, 

367 Urtext manuscript has it typed NOT, HLC holds it as “no” and we agree this is likely a typo. 
In the 
Notes it is clearly “no attack.” 

368 June 8, 1966 


1-322 


332 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


since they arise FROM it. 
But the relationship is NOT reciprocal. 
The 
whole does define the part, but the part does NOT define the whole. 

This is as true of knowledge as it is of perception. 
The reason why to 
KNOW in part is to know entirely is merely because of the funda¬ 
mental difference between knowledge and perception. 
In percep¬ 
tion, the whole is built up of parts, which can separate and reassem¬ 
ble in different constellations. 
Knowledge never changes, so that its 
constellation is permanent. 
The only areas in which part-whole rela¬ 
tionships have any meaning are those in which change is possible. 

There IS no difference between the whole and the part where 
change is impossible. 
T(370) C 197 

T 8 H 3. 
The body exists in a world which seems to contain two voices 
which are fighting for its possession. 
In this perceived constellation, 
the body is regarded as capable of shifting its control from one to 
the other, making the concept of both health and sickness possible. 

The ego makes a fundamental confusion between means and ends, 
as it always does. 
Regarding the body as an end, it has no real use 
for it at all, because it is NOT an end. 
You must have noticed an out¬ 
standing characteristic of every end that the ego has accepted as its 
own. 
When you have achieved it, IT HAS NOT SATISFIED YOU. 

This is why the ego is forced to shift from one end to another with¬ 
out ceasing, so that YOU will continue to hope it can offer you 
something. 


T 8 H 4. 
It has been particularly difficult to overcome the ego's belief 
in the body as an end because this is synonymous with ATTACK AS 
AN END. 
The ego has a REAL INVESTMENT IN SICKNESS. 
If you 
are sick, how can you object to the ego's firm belief that you are 
NOT invulnerable? This is a particularly appealing argument from 
the ego's point of view, because it obscures the obvious attack which 
underlies the sickness. 
If you accepted THIS, and also decided 
AGAINST attack, you could not give this false witness to the ego's 
stand. 
It is hard to perceive this as a false witness, because you do 
not realize that it IS entirely out of keeping with what YOU want. 



333 


1-323 


Volume I Text 


This witness, then, appears to be innocent and trustworthy only be¬ 
cause YOU have not seriously cross-examined him. 
T(37l) C 198 
T 8 H 5. 
If you did, you would not consider sickness such a strong 
witness on behalf of the ego's views. 
A more honest statement 
would be as follows: Those who WANT the ego are predisposed to 
defend it. 
Therefore, their choice of witnesses should be suspect 
from the beginning. 
The ego does not call upon witnesses who 
might disagree with its case, NOR DOES THE HOLY SPIRIT. 
We 
have said before that judgment IS the function of the Holy Spirit, 
and one which He is perfectly equipped to fulfill. 
The ego, as a 
judge, gives anything BUT an impartial trial 369 (judgment.) When 
the ego calls on a witness, it has ALREADY MADE IT AN ALLY. 
It 
is still true that the body has no function of itself. 
This is because it is 
NOT an end. 
The ego, however, establishes it AS an end because, as 
such, IT WILL LOSE ITS TRUE FUNCTION. 


T 8 H 6. 
This is the purpose of everything the ego does. 
Its sole aim is 
to lose sight of the functions of EVERYTHING. 
A sick body does not 
make any sense. 
It COULD not make any sense, since sickness is not 
what it is FOR. 
Sickness is meaningful only if the two basic premises 
on which the ego's interpretation of the body rests are true. 
These 
are specifically first that the body is for attack, and also that you 
ARE a body. 
Without this, sickness is completely inconceivable. 

Sickness is a way of demonstrating that YOU CAN BE HURT. 
It is a 
witness to your frailty, your vulnerability, and your extreme need to 
depend on external guidance. 
The ego uses this as its best argument 
for your need for ITS guidance. 
It dictates endless prescriptions for 
AVOIDING this catastrophic outcome. 
The Holy Spirit, perfectly 
aware of the same data, does not bother to T(372) c 199 analyze it at 
all. 
If the data are meaningless, there is no point in treating them at 
all. 
370 


369 HLC drops “trial” in favor of “judgment” - this material has not been located in the Notes. 


370 The words “at all” are crossed out in the Urtext manuscript. 



1-324 


334 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


T 8 H 7. 
The function of truth is to collect data which are TRUE. 
There 
is no point in trying to make sense out of meaningless data. 
ANY 
way they are 371 handled results in nothing. 
The more complicated 
the results become, the harder it may be to recognize their nothing¬ 
ness, but it is not necessary to examine ALL possible outcomes to 
which premises give rise to judge the PREMISES truly. 


T 8 H 8. 
A learning DEVICE is NOT a teacher. 
IT cannot tell you how 
you feel. 
YOU do not KNOW how you feel, because YOU HAVE 
ACCEPTED THE EGO's CONFUSION, 372 and YOU think A 
LEARNING DEVICE CAN TELL YOU HOW YOU 373 FEEL. 
Sickness 
is merely another example of your insistence on asking for guidance 
of a teacher who DOES NOT KNOW THE ANSWER. 
The ego is 
INCAPABLE of knowing how you feel. 
When we said that the ego 
DOES NOT KNOW ANYTHING, we said the one thing about the 
ego that is wholly true. 
But there is a corollary. 
If knowledge is be¬ 
ing, and the ego has no knowledge, then the ego HAS NO BEING. 


T 8 H 9. 
You might ask how the voice of something which does not 
exist can be so insistent. 
Have you ever seriously considered the dis¬ 
torting power of something you WANT, even if it is not true? You 
have had many instances of how what you want can distort what 
you see and hear. 
No one can doubt the ego's skill in building up 
false cases. 
And no one can doubt your willingness to listen, until 
YOU will not to tolerate ANYTHING except truth. 


T 8 H to. 
When YOU lay the ego aside it will be gone. 
The Holy 
Spirit's voice is as loud as your willingness to listen. 
It cannot be 
louder without violating your will, which He seeks to free but never 
to command. 
T(373) C 200 He will teach you to use your body ONLY 
to reach your brothers so He can teach His message through you. 

This will heal them and THEREFORE heal you. 
Everything used in 


’ 7I The Urtext manuscript has “it is” typed, and “they are” is penciled in. 
The Notes also has it as “it 
is.” 

372 Ur has it “ CONCLUSION ” crossed out with “ confusion ” written in. 
The Notes also has it as 
“confusion.” 

373 Urtext manuscript has it typed “TO” this is crossed out and “YOU” is written in. 
The Notes also has 
it as “you” rather than “to.” 


335 


1-325 





Volume I Text 


accordance with its function as HE sees it CANNOT be sick. 
Every¬ 
thing used otherwise IS. 


T 8 H 11. 
Do not allow the body to be a mirror of a split mind. 
Do not 
let it be an image of your own perception of littleness. 
Do not let it 
reflect your will to attack. 
Health is the natural state of anything 
whose interpretation is left to the Holy Spirit, who perceives no at¬ 
tack on anything. 
Health is the result of relinquishing ALL attempts 
to use the body lovelessly. 
It is the beginning of the proper perspec¬ 
tive on life, under the guidance of the one teacher who knows what 
life IS, being the voice for Life Itself. 


T 8 I. 
Healing as Corrected Perception (Notes 817 7:149) 

T 811 . 
We once said that the Holy Spirit is the Answer. 
374 He is the 
answer to EVERYTHING, because He knows what the answer to 
everything IS. 
The ego does not know what a REAL question is, al¬ 
though it asks an endless number. 
But YOU can learn this, as you 
learn to question the value of the ego and thus establish your ability 
to EVALUATE its questions. 
When the ego tempts you to sickness, 
do not ask the Holy Spirit to heal the body. 
For this would merely 
be to accept the ego's belief that the body is the proper aim for heal¬ 
ing. 
Ask rather that the Holy Spirit teach you the right PERCEP¬ 
TION of the body, for perception alone can be distorted. 


T 812 . 
ONLY PERCEPTION CAN BE SICK, because perception can 
be WRONG. 
Wrong perception is DISTORTED WILLING, which 
WANTS things to be as they are not. 
The reality of EVERYTHING is 
totally harmless, because total harmlessness is the CONDITION of 
its reality. 
It is also the condition of your AWARENESS of its reality. 

You do not have to SEEK reality. 
It will seek you and FIND you, 
WHEN YOU MEET ITS CONDITIONS. 
Its conditions are part of 
WHAT IT IS. 
And this part only is up to you. 
The rest is of Itself. 

You need T(374) c 201 do so little, because It is so powerful that your 
little part WILL bring the whole to you. 
Accept, then, your little 

374 UR 6 E 0 284 


1-326 


336 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


part, and LET the whole be yours. 
Wholeness heals BECAUSE it is 
of the 375 mind. 


T 813. 
All forms of sickness, even unto death, 376 are physical expres¬ 
sions of the FEAR OF AWAKENING. 
They are attempts to reinforce 
UNCONSCIOUSNESS out of fear of CONSCIOUSNESS . 
This is a 
pathetic way of TRYING NOT TO KNOW by rendering the faculties 
for knowing ineffectual. 
"Rest in peace" is a blessing for the living, 
not the dead, because rest comes from waking, not from sleeping. 

Sleep is withdrawing; waking is JOINING. 
Dreams are ILLUSIONS 
of joining, taking on the ego's distortions about what joining means, 
if you are sleeping under its guidance. 
But the Holy Spirit, too, has 
use for sleep, and can use dreams on BEHALF of waking, if you will 
let Him. 


T 814. 
How you wake is the sign of how you have used sleep. 
To 
whom did you give it? Under which teacher did you place it? 
Whenever you wake dis-spiritedly, it was NOT of the Spirit. 
ONLY 
when you awaken joyously have you utilized sleep ACCORDING 
TO THE HOLY SPIRIT's PURPOSE. 
You can indeed be "drugged by 
sleep," but this is ALWAYS because you have MISUSED IT ON 
BEHALF OF SICKNESS. 
Sleep is no more a form of death than 
death is a form of unconsciousness. 
UNCONSCIOUSNESS IS IM¬ 
POSSIBLE. 
You can rest in peace only BECAUSE YOU ARE 
AWAKE. 


T 815. 
Healing is release from the fear of waking, and the substitu¬ 
tion of the will to wake. 
The will to wake is the will to love, since 
ALL healing involves replacing fear with love. 
The Holy Spirit can¬ 
not distinguish among degrees of error, for if He taught that one 
form of sickness is more serious than another. 
He would be teaching 
that one error can be more REAL than another. 
But HIS function is 
to distinguish ONLY between the false and the true, REPLACING 
the false WITH the true. 
T(375) C 202 


,75 The word “the” is not in the Ur but is in the HLC and the Notes. 


' ll ' John 11:4 When Jesus heard that. 
He said, “This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, 
that the Son of God may be glorified through it.” 


337 


1-327 





Volume I Text 


T 816 . 
The ego, which always WEAKENS the will, wants to SEPA¬ 
RATE the body from the mind. 
This IS an attempt to DESTROY it. 

But the ego actually believes that it is PROTECTING it. 
This is be¬ 
cause it believes that MIND IS DANGEROUS, and that to MAKE 
MINDLESS is to heal. 
But to make mindless is impossible, since it 
would mean to make nothing out of what God Created. 
The ego 
DESPISES weakness, even though it makes every effort to INDUCE 
it. 
IT WANTS ONLY WHAT IT HATES. 
To the ego this is perfectly 
sensible. 
Believing in the power of attack, it WANTS it. 


T 817. 
You have begun to realize that this is a very practical course, 
because it means EXACTLY what it says. 
So does the Bible, if it is 
properly understood. 
There has been a marked tendency on the part 
of many of the Bible's followers, and also its translators, to be en¬ 
tirely literal about fear and ITS effects, but NOT about love and ITS 
results. 
Thus, "hellfire" means burning, but raising the dead be¬ 
comes allegorical. 
Actually, it is PARTICULARLY the references to 
the outcomes of love that should be taken literally because the Bible 
is ABOUT love, being about GOD. 


T 818 . 
The Bible enjoins you to be perfect, 377 to heal ALL errors, to 
take no thought of the body AS SEPARATE, and to accomplish all 
things IN MY NAME. 
This is not my name alone, for ours is a 
shared identification. 
The name of God's Son is One, and you are 
enjoined to do the works of love BECAUSE we share this oneness. 

Our minds are whole BECAUSE they are one. 
If you are sick, you 
are withdrawing from me. 
But you CANNOT WITHDRAW FROM 
ME ALONE. 
You can only withdraw from yourself AND me. 


T 819.1 would not ask you to do things which you CANNOT do, 
and it is impossible that I could do things YOU cannot do. 
Given 
this, and given this QUITE LITERALLY, there CAN be nothing 
which prevents you from doing EXACTLY what I ask, and EVERY¬ 
THING which argues FOR it. 
I give you NO limits, because God 
lays none upon you. 
T(376) C 203 When you limit YOURSELF, we are 


111 Matthew 5:48 “Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect.” 


1-328 


338 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


NOT of one mind, and that IS sickness. 
But sickness is not of the 
body, but OF THE MIND. 
ALL forms of Disfunction are merely 
signs that the mind has split, and does not accept a UNIFIED PUR¬ 
POSE. 


T 8110 . 
The unification of purpose, then, is the Holy Spirit's ONLY 
way of healing. 
This is because it is the only level at which healing 
MEANS anything. 
The re-establishing of meaning in a chaotic 
thought system IS the only way to heal it. 
We said before that your 
task is only to meet the conditions FOR meaning, since meaning it¬ 
self is of God. 
But your RETURN to meaning is essential TO HIS, 
because YOUR meaning is PART of His. 
Your healing, then, is part 
of HIS health, because it is part of His Wholeness. 
He cannot lose 
this, but YOU can not know it. 
Yet it is still His will for you, and His 
will MUST stand forever and in all things. 
T(377) C 204 

T 8 J. 
The Acceptance of Reality (Notes 824 7:156) 

T 8 J l. 
Fear of the Will of God is one of the strangest beliefs that the 
human mind has ever made. 
This could not possibly have occurred 
unless the mind was already profoundly split, making it possible for 
IT to be afraid of what it really is. 
It is apparent that reality CAN¬ 
NOT "threaten" anything except illusions, because reality can only 
UPHOLD truth. 
The very fact that the will of God, which IS what 
you are, is perceived as fearful TO you demonstrates that you ARE 
afraid of what you are. 
It is not, then, the will of God of which you 
are afraid, but YOURS. 
Your will is NOT the ego's, and that is why 
the ego is against you. 
What seems to be the fear of God is really 
only the fear of YOUR OWN REALITY. 


T 8 J 2. 
It is impossible to learn anything consistently in a state of 
panic. 
If the purpose of this course is to learn what you are, and if 
you have ALREADY DECIDED that what you are is FEARFUL, then 
it MUST follow that you will NOT LEARN THIS COURSE. 
But you 
might remember that the reason FOR the course is that you do NOT 
know who you are. 
If you do not know your reality, how would you 
know whether it is fearful or not? The association of truth and fear, 
which would be highly artificial at best, is particularly inappropriate 


339 


1-329 


Volume I Text 


in the minds of those who do not know what truth IS. 
All that this 
kind of association means is that you are arbitrarily endowing some¬ 
thing quite beyond your awareness with something YOU DO NOT 
WANT. 


T 8 J 3. 
It is evident, then, that you are judging something of which 
you are totally unaware. 
You have set this strange situation up so 
that it is COMPLETELY IMPOSSIBLE to escape from it WITHOUT a 
guide who DOES know what your reality is. 
The purpose of this 
Guide is merely to remind you of what YOU want. 
He is not at¬ 
tempting to force an alien will UPON you. 
He is merely making 
every possible effort, within the limits YOU impose upon Him, to 
RE-ESTABLISH your OWN will in your consciousness. 
You have 
IMPRISONED it in your UNconscious, where it remains available, 
but cannot help you. 
When we said that the Holy Spirit's function is 
to sort out the true from the false in your unconscious, we meant 
that He has the power to look into what YOU have T(378) C 205 hid¬ 
den, and perceive the Will of God there. 


T 8 J 4. 
His perception of this will can make it real to YOU, because 
HE is in your mind, and therefore He IS your reality. 
If, then. 
His 
perception OF your mind brings its reality TO you. 
He IS teaching 
you what you are. 
The only source of fear in this whole process can 
ONLY be WHAT YOU THINK YOU LOSE. 
But it is only what the 
Holy Spirit sees that you can possibly HAVE. 
We have emphasized 
many times that the Holy Spirit will never call upon you to sacrifice 
anything. 
But if you ask the sacrifice of reality OF YOURSELVES, 
the Holy Spirit MUST remind you that this is not God's will BE¬ 
CAUSE it is not yours. 


T 8 J 5. 
There is NO DIFFERENCE between your will and God's. 
If 
you did not have divided wills, you would recognize that willing is 
salvation because it IS communication. 
It is impossible to communi¬ 
cate in alien tongues. 
378 You and your Creator can communicate 


“’ 7S Genesis 11:1-9 Now the whole earth had one language and one speech. 
And it came to pass, as they 
journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they dwelt there. 
Then they 
said to one another, “Come, let us make bricks and bake them thoroughly.” They had brick for stone, 


1-330 


340 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


through creation, because that, and only that, IS your joint will. 
Di¬ 
vided wills do not communicate because they speak for different 
things TO THE SAME MIND. 
This loses the ability to communicate, 
simply because confused communication DOES NOT MEAN ANY¬ 
THING. 
A message cannot be said to be communicated UNLESS it 
makes sense. 


T 8 J 6. 
How sensible can your messages be, when they ask for 
WHAT YOU DON'T WANT? Yet as long as you are afraid of your 
will, this is precisely what you WILL ask for. 
You may insist that the 
Holy Spirit does not answer you, but it might be wiser to consider 
the kind of asker you are. 
YOU DO NOT ASK ONLY FOR WHAT 
YOU WANT. 
This is SOLELY because you are afraid you might re¬ 
ceive it, AND YOU WOULD. 
THIS is really why you persist in ask¬ 
ing the teacher who could not possibly teach you your will. 
Of him, 
you can never learn it, and this gives you the illusion of safety. 
But 
you cannot be safe FROM truth, but only IN it. 
Reality is the ONLY 
safety. 


T 8 J 7. 
Your will is your salvation BECAUSE IT IS THE SAME AS 
GOD's. 
The separation is nothing more than the belief that it is DIF¬ 
FERENT. 
NO mind can believe that its will is STRONGER than 
God's. 
If, then, a mind believes that ITS will is different FROM His, 
it can only decide either that there IS no God, or that GOD'S WILL 
IS FEARFUL. 
The former accounts for the atheist, and the latter for 
the martyr. 
Martyrdom takes many forms, the category including 
ALL T(379) C 206 doctrines which hold that God demands sacrifices of 
ANY kind. 



and they had asphalt for mortar. 
And they said, “Come, let us build ourselves a city, and a tower whose 
top is in the heavens; let us make a name for ourselves, lest we be scattered abroad over the face of the 
whole earth.” 

But the LORD came down to see the city and the tower which the sons of men had built. 
And the 
LORD said, “Indeed the people are one and they all have one language, and this is what they begin to 
do; now nothing that they propose to do will be withheld from them. 
Come, let Us go down and there 
confuse their language, that they may not understand one another’s speech.” So the LORD scattered 
them abroad from there over the face of all the earth, and they ceased building the city. 
Therefore its 
name is called Babel, because there the LORD confused the language of all the earth; and from there 
the LORD scattered them abroad over the face of all the earth. 



341 


1-331 



Volume I Text 


T 8 J 8. 
Either basic type of insane decision will induce panic, because 
the atheist believes he is alone and the martyr believes that God is 
crucifying him. 
Both really fear both abandonment AND retaliation, 
but the former is more reactive against abandonment and the latter 
against retaliation. 
The atheist maintains that God has left him, but 
he does not care. 
He will, however, become very fearful, and hence 
very ANGRY, if anyone suggests that God has NOT left him. 
The 
martyr, on the other hand, is more aware of guilt, and believing that 
punishment is inevitable, attempts to teach himself to LIKE it. 


T 8 J 9. 
The truth is, very simply, that NO-ONE WANTS EITHER 
ABANDONMENT OR RETALIATION. 
Many people SEEK both, 
but it is still true that they do NOT want it. 
Can you ask the Holy 
Spirit for "gifts" such as these, and actually expect to RECEIVE 
them? The Holy Spirit is totally incapable of giving YOU anything 
that does NOT come from God. 
His task is NOT to make anything 
FOR you. 
He CANNOT make you want something you DON'T 
want. 
When you ask the Universal Giver for what you do not want, 
YOU are asking for what CANNOT be given, BECAUSE IT WAS 
NEVER CREATED. 
It was never created because it was never your 
will for YOU. 


T 8 J10 . 
Ultimately everyone must learn the will of God, because ul¬ 
timately everyone must recognize HIMSELF. 
This recognition IS the 
recognition that HIS WILL AND GOD'S ARE ONE. 
In the presence 
of Truth, there are no unbelievers and no sacrifices. 
In the security of 
Reality fear is totally meaningless. 
To deny what IS can only SEEM 
to be fearful. 
Fear cannot be real without a cause, and GOD is the 
only Cause. 
God is Love, 379 and you DO want Him. 
This IS your 
will. 
Ask for THIS and you WILL be answered, because you will be 
asking only for what BELONGS to you. 
T(380) c 207 
T 8 J ll. 
When you ask the Holy Spirit for what would hurt you. 
He 
CANNOT answer, because NOTHING can hurt you and SO YOU 


’ 71 ’ 1 John 4:8 He who does not love does not know God, for God is love. 
And we have known and 
believed the love that God has for us. 
God is love, and he who abides in love abides in God, and God in 
him. 
Also 1 John 4:16 


1-332 


342 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


ARE ASKING FOR NOTHING. 
ANY desire which stems from the 
ego IS a desire for nothing, and to ask for it IS NOT A REQUEST. 
It 
is merely a denial in the FORM of a request. 
The Holy Spirit is not 
concerned with form at all, being aware only of MEANING. 
The ego 
cannot ask the Holy Spirit for ANYTHING, because there is COM¬ 
PLETE COMMUNICATION FAILURE between them. 
But YOU can 
ask for EVERYTHING of the Holy Spirit, because YOUR requests 
are real, being of your will. 
Would the Holy Spirit deny the Will of 
God? And could He fail to recognize it in God's Sons? 

T 8 J 12. 
The energy which you withdraw from Creation you expend 
on fear. 
This is not because your ENERGY is limited, but because 
YOU HAVE LIMITED IT. 
You do not recognize the ENORMOUS 
waste of energy which you expend in denying truth. 
What would 
YOU say of someone who PERSISTED in attempting the impossible, 
and believed that to ACHIEVE it is SUCCESS? The belief that you 
MUST HAVE THE IMPOSSIBLE in order to be happy is totally at 
variance with the principle of Creation. 
God COULD not will that 
happiness DEPENDED on what you could never have. 


T 8 J13. 
The fact that God is love does not require belief, but it DOES 
require ACCEPTANCE. 
It is indeed possible for you to DENY facts, 
although it is IMPOSSIBLE for you to CHANGE them. 
If you hold 
your hands over your eyes you will NOT see, because you are inter¬ 
fering with the laws of seeing. 
If you deny love you will NOT 
KNOW IT because your cooperation is the LAW OF ITS BEING. 


You cannot change laws you did not make, and the laws of happi¬ 
ness were created FOR you, NOT BY you. 


T 8 J 14. 
Attempts of any kind to deny what IS are fearful, and if they 
are strong they WILL induce panic. 
WILLING AGAINST reality, 
though impossible, can be MADE into a very persistent goal, EVEN 
THOUGH YOU DO NOT WANT IT. 
But consider the result of this 
strange decision. 
T(38l) c 208 You are DEVOTING your mind to what 
you DO NOT WANT. 
How real can this devotion be? If you do not 
want it, it was never created. 
If it was never created, it is nothing. 

Can you REALLY devote yourself to nothing? 


343 


1-333 


Volume I Text 


T 8 J15. 
God, in His devotion to YOU, created you devoted to EVE¬ 
RYTHING, and GAVE you what you are devoted TO. 
Otherwise, 
you would not have been created perfect. 
Reality IS everything, and 
you therefore have everything BECAUSE you are real. 
You cannot 
make the UNreal because the ABSENCE of reality is fearful, and 
fear cannot BE created. 
As long as you believe that fear is possible, 
YOU WILL NOT CREATE. 
Opposing orders of reality MAKE RE¬ 
ALITY MEANINGLESS, and reality is MEANING. 


T 8 J16. 
Remember, then, that God's Will is ALREADY possible, and 
nothing else will EVER be. 
This is the simple acceptance of Reality 
because only this is real. 
You cannot DISTORT reality and KNOW 
WHAT IT IS. 
And if you DO distort reality you will experience 
anxiety, depression, and ultimately panic, because you are trying to 
MAKE YOURSELF UNREAL. 
When you feel these things do not try 
to look BEYOND yourself for truth, for truth can only be WITHIN 
you. 
Say, therefore,: 

"Christ is in me, and where He is God MUST be, for Christ is PART 
of Him." T(382) - 209 - 

T 8 K. 
The Answer to Prayer (Notes 828 7:160) 

T 8 K 1 . 
Everyone who has ever tried to use prayer to request some¬ 
thing, has experienced what appears to be failure. 
This is not only 
true in connection with specific things which might be harmful, but 
also in connection with requests which are strictly in line with this 
course. 
The latter, in particular, might be incorrectly interpreted as 
"proof" that the course does not mean what it says. 
But you must 
remember that the course does state, and REPEATEDLY, that its 
purpose is the ESCAPE FROM FEAR. 


T 8 K 2. 
Let us suppose, then, that what you request of the Holy Spirit 
IS what you really want, but that YOU ARE STILL AFRAID OF IT. 

Should this be the case, your ATTAINMENT of it would no longer 
BE what you want, even if IT is. 
This accounts for why CERTAIN 
SPECIFIC FORMS of healing are not achieved, even though the 
STATE of healing IS. 
It frequently happens that an individual asks 


1-334 


344 


Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


for physical healing, because he is fearful OF BODILY HARM. 

However, at the same time, if he WERE healed physically, the threat 
to his thought-system would be considerably MORE fearful to him 
than its physical EXPRESSION. 
In this case, he is not really asking 
for RELEASE from fear, but for the removal of a symptom WHICH 
HE HAS SELECTED. 
This request is, therefore, NOT for healing at 
all. 


T 8 K 3. 
The Bible emphasizes that ALL prayers are answered, 380 and 
this must be true, if no effort is wasted. 
The very fact that one has 
asked the Holy Spirit for ANYTHING, will ensure a response. 
But it 
is equally certain that no response, given by the Holy Spirit, will 
EVER be one which would INCREASE fear. 
It is even possible that 
His answer will not be heard at all. 
It is IMpossible, however, that it 
will be lost. 
There are many answers which you have already re¬ 
ceived, but have NOT YET HEARD. 
I assure you that they are wait¬ 
ing for you. 
It is indeed true that no effort is wasted. 
T(383) -210 
T 8 K 4. 
If you would know your prayers are answered, never doubt a 
Son of God. 
Do not question him, and do not confound him, for 
your faith in him is your faith in YOURSELF. 
If you would know 
God and His Answer, believe in me, whose faith in YOU cannot be 
shaken. 
Can you ask of the Holy Spirit truly, and doubt your 
brother? Believe his words are true, because of the truth which is in 
him. 
You will unite with the truth in him, and his words will BE 
true. 
As you hear him, you will hear me. 


T 8 K 5. 
LISTENING to truth is the only way you can hear it now, and 
finally KNOW it. 
The message your brother gives you is UP TO 
YOU. 
What does he say to you? What would YOU have him say? 
Your decision ABOUT him determines the message YOU receive. 

Remember that the Holy Spirit is in him, and His Voice speaks to 


,R0 Matthew 21:22 “And whatever things you ask in prayer, believing, you will receive.” 

John 14:13 “And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in 
the Son.” 

John 15:16 “Ye did not choose me, but I chose you, and appointed you, that ye should go and bear 
fruit, and that your fruit should abide: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may 
give it you.” 


345 


1-335 



Volume I Text 


YOU through him. 
What can so holy a brother tell you EXCEPT 
truth? But are you LISTENING to it? 

T 8 K 6. 
Your brother may not know who he is, but there is a Light in 
his mind which DOES know. 
This Light can shine 381 into yours, 
making HIS words true, and you ABLE TO HEAR THEM. 
His 
words ARE the Holy Spirit's answer to YOU. 
Is your faith in him 
strong enough to LET you listen and hear? Salvation is of your 
brother. 
The Holy Spirit extends from your mind to his, and an¬ 
swers YOU. 
You cannot hear the Voice for God in yourself alone, 
because you are NOT alone. 
And His answer is only for what you 
ARE. 


T 8 K 7. 
You will not know the trust I have in you, unless you EX¬ 
TEND it. 
You will not trust the guidance of the Holy Spirit, or be¬ 
lieve that it is for YOU, unless you hear it in others. 
T(384) -211 It 
MUST be for your brother, BECAUSE it is for you. 
Would God have 
created a Voice for you alone? Could you hear His answer EXCEPT 
as He answers ALL of God's Sons? Hear of your brother what you 
would have me hear of YOU, for you would not want ME to be de¬ 
ceived. 


T 8 K 8.1 love you for the truth in you, as GOD does. 
Your deceptions 
may deceive YOU, but they CANNOT deceive ME. 
Knowing what 
you ARE, I CANNOT doubt you. 
I hear only the Holy Spirit in you. 

Who speaks to me through YOU. 
If you would hear ME, hear my 
brothers, in whom God's Voice speaks. 
The answer to ALL your 
prayers lies in them. 
You will be answered as you HEAR THE AN¬ 
SWER IN EVERYONE. 
Do not listen to anything else, or you will 
not hear truth. 


T 8 K 9. 
Believe in your brothers BECAUSE I believe in you, and you 
will learn that my belief in you is justified. 
Believe in me BY believ¬ 
ing in them, for the sake of what God gave them. 
THEY WILL AN¬ 
SWER YOU, if you learn to ask truth of them. 
Do not ask for bless- 


381 Matthew 5:16 “Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify 
your Father in heaven.” 


1-336 


346 



Chapter 8 - The Journey Back 


ings without blessing THEM, for only in this way can YOU learn 
how blessed YOU are. 
By following this way, you ARE looking for 
the truth in YOU. 
This is not going BEYOND yourself, but TO¬ 
WARD yourself. 
Hear only God's answer in His Sons, and YOU are 
answered. 


T 8 K to. 
To disbelieve is to side AGAINST, or to ATTACK. 
To be¬ 
lieve is to accept, and SIDE WITH. 
To believe is not to be credulous, 
but to accept and APPRECIATE. 
What you do NOT believe you do 
NOT APPRECIATE, and you CANNOT be grateful for what you do 
not VALUE. 
There is a price you will pay for judgment, because 

judgment IS the setting of price. 
And as you set it, you WILL pay it. 

T(385)212 - 

T 8 K ll. 
If paying is equated with GETTING, you will set the PRICE 
low, but demand a high RETURN. 
But you will have forgotten that 
to price is to VALUE, so that YOUR return is IN PROPORTION TO 
YOUR JUDGMENT OF WORTH. 
If paying is associated with giv¬ 
ing, IT CANNOT BE PERCEIVED AS LOSS, and the RECIPROCAL 
relationship of giving and RECEIVING will be recognized. 
The price 
will then be set high, because of the value of the RETURN. 


T 8 K12. 
To price for GETTING is to LOSE SIGHT OF VALUE, mak¬ 
ing it inevitable that you will NOT value what you receive. 
Valuing 
it little, you will not appreciate it, and you will not WANT it. 
Never 
forget, then, that YOU have set the value on what you receive, and 
have priced it BY what you give. 
To believe that it is possible to get 
much FOR little, is to believe that you can bargain with God. 


T 8 K13. 
God's laws are ALWAYS fair, and PERFECTLY consistent. 

BY giving, you receive. 
But to receive is to ACCEPT, NOT to get. 
It 
is impossible not to HAVE, but it IS possible NOT TO KNOW YOU 
HAVE. 
The recognition of HAVING is the willingness for GIVING, 
and ONLY by this willingness, can you RECOGNIZE what you 
have. 
What you give is therefore the value you put on what you 


347 


1-337 


Volume I Text 


have, being the exact measure of the value you PUT upon it . 
382 And 
this, in turn, is the measure of HOW MUCH YOU WANT IT. 


T 8 K14. 
You can ASK of the Holy Spirit, then, ONLY by giving TO 
Him. 
And you can GIVE to Him only WHERE YOU SEE HIM. 
If 
you SEE Him in everyone, consider how much you will be asking 
OF Him, and HOW MUCH YOU WILL RECEIVE. 
He will deny you 
nothing, because you have denied Him nothing, and so you can 
SHARE EVERYTHING. 
This is the way, and the ONLY way, to have 
His answer, because His answer is all you can ask for and WANT. 

Say, then, to everyone, 

"Because I will to know myself, I see you as God's Son and my 
brother." T(386) -213 


382 Matthew 7:2 “For with what judgment you judge, you will be judged; and with the measure you 
use, it will be measured back to you.” 


1-338 


PROOF 


348 


COPY 



Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 
T 9 A. 
Introduction (Notes 833 7:165) 

T 9 A l. 
The alertness of the ego to the errors which other egos make, 
is NOT the kind of vigilance which the Holy Spirit would have you 
maintain. 
Egos are critical in terms of the kind of sense they STAND 
FOR. 
THEY understand this kind of sense, because it IS sensible to 
them. 
To the Holy Spirit, it makes no sense at all. 
To the ego, it is 
kind and right and good to point out errors, and "correct" them. 

This makes PERFECT sense to the ego, which is TOTALLY unaware 
of what errors ARE, and what correction IS. 


T 9 A 2. 
Errors ARE 383 the ego, and CORRECTION of errors of ANY 
kind lies solely in the RELINQUISHMENT of the ego. 
When you 
CORRECT a brother, you are telling him that he is WRONG. 
He 
may be making no sense at the time, and it is certain that if he is 
speaking from the ego, he WILL be making no sense, but your task 
is still to tell him HE IS RIGHT. 
You do not tell him this verbally if 
he is SPEAKING foolishly, because he needs correction AT AN¬ 
OTHER LEVEL, since his error IS at another level. 
HE is still right, 
because he is a Son of God. 
His ego is ALWAYS wrong, no matter 
WHAT it says or does. 


T 9 A 3. 
If you point out the errors of HIS ego, you MUST be seeing 
him through yours, because the Holy Spirit DOES NOT PERCEIVE 
HIS ERRORS. 
This MUST be true, if there is no communication AT 
ALL between the ego and the Holy Spirit. 
The ego makes NO sense, 
and the Holy Spirit does not attempt to understand ANYTHING 
that arises from it. 
Since He does not understand it. 
He DOES NOT 
JUDGE IT, KNOWING that nothing it engenders MEANS ANY¬ 
THING. 



383 The HLC inserts the word “of’ here, it is not in the Ur manuscript, nor is it in the Notes. 



349 


1-339 




Volume I Text 

T 9 B. 
Sanity and Perception (Notes 834 7:167) 

T 9 B l. 
When you react AT ALL to errors, you are NOT LISTENING 
TO THE HOLY SPIRIT. 
He has merely disregarded them, and if you 
ATTEND to them, you are NOT HEARING HIM. 
If you do not hear 
HIM, you are listening to YOUR ego, and making as little sense as 
the brother whose errors you perceive. 
This CANNOT be correction. 

But it is more than merely lack of correction for him. 
It is the GIV¬ 
ING UP of correction in YOURSELF. 
T(387) -214 

T 9 B 2. 
When a brother behaves insanely, you can heal him ONLY by 
perceiving the SANITY in him. 
If you perceive his errors and AC¬ 
CEPT them, you are accepting YOURS. 
If you want to give YOURS 
over to the Holy Spirit, you must do this with HIS. 
Unless this be¬ 
comes the ONE way in which you handle ALL errors, you cannot 
understand HOW ALL ERRORS ARE UNDONE. 
How is this differ¬ 
ent from telling you that what you teach you LEARN? Your brother 
is as right as you are. 
And if you think he is WRONG, you are con¬ 
demning YOURSELF. 


T 9 B 3. 
YOU cannot correct YOURSELF. 
Is it possible, then, for you 
to correct another? But you CAN see him truly, because it IS possi¬ 
ble for you to see YOURSELF truly. 
It is not up to you to CHANGE 
him, but merely to accept him AS HE IS. 
His errors do not come 
from the truth that is in him, and ONLY this truth is yours. 
His er¬ 
rors cannot change this, and can have no effect at all on the truth in 
YOU. 


T 9 B 4. 
To perceive errors in anyone, and to REACT to them AS IF 
THEY WERE REAL, is to MAKE them real to you. 
You will not es¬ 
cape paying the price for this, NOT because you are being PUN¬ 
ISHED for it, but because you are following the wrong guide, and 
will 384 lose your way. 
Your brother's errors are not of him, any more 
than yours are OF YOU. 
Accept his errors as real, and you have at¬ 
tacked YOURSELF. 
If you would find YOUR way AND KEEP IT, 
see only truth beside you, for you walk together. 


: The word “WiLL” is handwritten in. 
It is also present in the Notes. 



1-340 


350 



Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


T9B5. 
The Holy Spirit in you forgives all things in you, AND your 
brother. 
HIS errors are forgiven WITH yours. 
Atonement is no more 
separate than love. 
It CANNOT be separate, because it COMES from 
Love. 
ANY attempt you make to correct a brother, means that you 
believe correction by YOU is possible, and this can ONLY be the ar¬ 
rogance of the ego. 
Correction is of God, Who does not know of ar¬ 
rogance. 
The Holy Spirit forgives everything, BECAUSE GOD 
CREATED EVERYTHING. 
Do not undertake HIS function, or you 
will forget YOURS. 
T(388) -215 

T 9 B 6. 
Accept ONLY the function of healing in time, because that is 
what time is FOR. 
GOD gave you the function to create in eternity. 

You do not need to learn this. 
But you DO need to learn to WANT 
this, and for THIS all learning was made. 
This is the Holy Spirit's 
good use of an ability which you do not need, but which you HAVE 
made. 
Give it to Him; you do NOT know how to use it. 
He will 
teach you how to see YOURSELF without condemnation, by learn¬ 
ing how to look on EVERYTHING without it. 
Condemnation will 
then not be real to you, and all YOUR errors WILL be forgiven. 


T 9 C. 
Atonement as a Lesson in Sharing (Notes 838 7:170) 

T 9 c l. 
Atonement is for all, because it is the way to UNDO the belief 
that ANYTHING is for you ALONE. 
To forgive is to OVERLOOK. 

Look, then, BEYOND error, and do not let your perception rest 
UPON it, for you will believe what your perception HOLDS. 
Accept 
as true only what your brother IS, if you would know yourself. 
Per¬ 
ceive what he is NOT, and you CANNOT know what you are, BE¬ 
CAUSE you see HIM falsely. 
Remember always that your identity is 
shared, and that its sharing IS its reality. 


T 9 c 2. 
You have a PART to play in the Atonement. 
But the plan of 
the Atonement IS beyond you. 
You do not know how to OVER¬ 
LOOK errors, or you would not make them. 
It would merely be fur¬ 
ther error to think either that you do NOT make them, or that you 
can CORRECT them without a GUIDE TO CORRECTION. 
And if 


351 


1-341 


Volume I Text 


you do not FOLLOW this Guide , 385 your errors will NOT be cor¬ 
rected. 
The plan is not yours BECAUSE of your limited ideas about 
WHAT YOU ARE. 
But this limitation IS where ALL ERRORS 
ARISE. 
The way to UNDO them is, therefore, not OF you, but FOR 
you. 


T 9 C 3. 
The Atonement is a lesson in sharing, which is given you be¬ 
cause YOU HAVE FORGOTTEN HOW TO DO IT. 
The Holy Spirit 
merely reminds you of what is your NATURAL ability. 
By RE¬ 
INTERPRETING the ability to ATTACK, which you DID make, into 
the ability to SHARE, He TRANSLATES what you have made, into 
what God created. 
But if you would accomplish this THROUGH 
Him, you cannot look on your abilities through the eyes of the ego, 
or you will judge them as IT does. 
All their harmfulness lies in ITS 
judgment. 
T(389) -216 All their HELPFULNESS lies in the judgment of 
the Holy Spirit. 


T 9 c 4. 
The ego has a plan of forgiveness, because you are ASKING 
for one, but not of the right teacher. 
The EGO's plan, of course, 
MAKES NO SENSE and WILL NOT WORK. 
By following it, you 
will merely place yourself in an impossible situation, to which the 
ego ALWAYS leads you. 
Its plan is to have you SEE ERROR 
CLEARLY FIRST, and THEN overlook it. 
But how CAN you over¬ 
look what you have made real? By seeing it clearly, you HAVE 
made it real, and CANNOT overlook it. 


T 9 c 5. 
This is where the ego is forced into appealing to mysteries, 
and begins to insist that you accept the meaningless, to save your¬ 
self. 
Many have tried to do this in my name, forgetting that my 
words make PERFECT sense, because they come from GOD. 
They 
are as sensible now as they ever were, because they speak of ideas 
which are eternal. 
Forgiveness that is learned of ME does not use 
fear to UNDO fear. 
Nor does it make real the UNreal, and then de¬ 
stroy it. 



~’ s5 Originally it appears to have been typed with a lower case “g”, and the capital is overwritten by 
hand. 
It is also capitalized in the Notes. 



1-342 


352 




Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


T 9 C 6. 
Forgiveness through the Holy Spirit lies simply in looking 
beyond error from the beginning, and thus KEEPING it unreal for 
you. 
Do not let any belief in its realness 386 enter your minds AT ALL, 
or you will also believe that you must UNDO what you have made, 
in order to BE forgiven. 
What has no effect does not exist, and to the 
Holy Spirit, the effects of error are TOTALLY non-existent. 
By stead¬ 
ily and consistently canceling out ALL its effects, EVERYWHERE 
AND IN ALL RESPECTS, He teaches that the ego does not exist, 
and PROVES IT. 
Follow His teaching in forgiveness, then, because 
forgiveness IS His function, and HE knows how to fulfill it perfectly. 

T(390) -217 That is what we meant when we once said that miracles 
are NATURAL, and when they do NOT occur, something has gone 
wrong. 
Miracles are merely the sign of your willingness to follow 
HIS plan of Salvation, in recognition of the FACT that you do NOT 
know what it is. 
His work is NOT your function, and unless you ac¬ 
cept this, you CANNOT learn what your function IS. 


T 9 c 7. 
The confusion of functions is so typical of the ego, that you 
should be quite familiar with it by now. 
The ego believes that ALL 
functions belong to IT, even though it has no idea what they ARE. 

This is more than mere confusion. 
It is a particularly dangerous 
combination of grandiosity AND confusion, that makes it likely that 
the ego will attack anyone and anything, for no reason at all. 
This is 
exactly what it DOES. 
It is TOTALLY unpredictable in its responses, 
because it has no idea WHAT it heard. 


T 9 C 8. 
If one has no idea what is happening, how appropriately can 
you EXPECT him to react? But you might still ask yourself, regard¬ 
less of how you can ACCOUNT for the reactions, whether they 
place the ego in a very sound position as a guide for YOURS. 
It 
seems absurd to have to emphasize repeatedly that the ego's qualifi¬ 
cations as a guide are singularly unfortunate, and that it is a re¬ 
markably poor choice as a teacher of salvation. 
Yet this question. 



386 “reality” probably should be substituted for “realness” but all later editors leave “realness” in place 
and the Notes also has this reading. 



353 


1-343 



Volume I Text 


ridiculous as it seems, is REALLY the crucial issue in the whole 
separation fantasy. 


T 9 c 9. 
Anyone who elects a totally insane guide, MUST be totally 
insane himself. 
It is not true that you do not know the guide is in¬ 
sane. 
YOU know it because I know it, and you HAVE judged it by 
the same Standard as I have. 
The ego literally lives on borrowed 
time, and ITS days ARE numbered. 
Do not fear the last judgment, 387 
but welcome it and do not wait, for the ego's time is T(391) -218 bor¬ 
rowed from YOUR eternity. 
This IS the Second Coming, 388 which 
was made FOR you, as the First was created. 


T 9 c 10. 
The Second Coming is merely the return of SENSE. 
Can this 
POSSIBLY be fearful? What can be fearful but fantasy, and no one 
turns to fantasy unless he despairs of satisfaction in reality. 
But it is 
CERTAIN that he will NEVER find satisfaction in fantasy, so that 
his ONLY hope is to change his mind about REALITY. 
Only if the 
decision that reality is fearful is WRONG, can GOD be right. 
And I 
ASSURE you that God IS right. 


T 9 c 11. 
Be glad, then, that you HAVE been wrong, but this was only 
because you did not know who you WERE. 
Had you REMEM¬ 
BERED, you could no more have been wrong than God can. 
The 
impossible can happen ONLY in fantasy. 
When you search for real¬ 
ity in fantasies, you will not find it. 
The symbols of fantasy are of the 
ego, and of THESE you will find many. 
But do not look for meaning 
in them. 
They have no more meaning than the fantasies into which 
they are woven. 



387 Matthew 11:22 “But I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of 
judgment than for you.” 

And he charged us to preach unto the people, and to testify that this is he who is ordained of God to be 
the Judge of the living and the dead. 


Acts 10:42-43 To him bear all the prophets witness, that through his name every one that believeth on 
him shall receive remission of sins. 


88 Matthew 16:27 “For the Son of Man will come in the glory of His Father with His angels, and then 
He will reward each according to his works.” 

Matthew 25:31 “When the Son of Man comes in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, then He 
will sit on the throne of His glory.” 


1-344 


354 



Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


T 9 c 12. 
Fairy tales can be pleasant or fearful, pretty or ugly, but NO 
ONE calls them TRUE. 
Children may believe them, and so, for a 
while, they ARE true for them. 
But when Reality dawns, they are 
gone. 
REALITY has NOT gone in the meanwhile. 
The 389 Second 
Coming is the AWARENESS of Reality, not its RETURN. 
Behold, 
my children. 
Reality is here. 
It belongs to you and me and God, and 
is perfectly satisfying to all of us. 
Only THIS awareness heals, be¬ 
cause it is the awareness of truth. 
T(392) -219 

T 9 D. 
The Unhealed Healer (Notes 846 7:178) 

T 9 D l. 
The ego's plan for forgiveness is far more widely used than 
God's. 
This is because it is undertaken by unhealed healers, and IS 
therefore of the ego. 
Let us consider the unhealed healer more care¬ 
fully now. 
By definition, he is trying to GIVE what he has NOT re¬ 
ceived. 
If he is a theologian, he may begin with the premise, "I am a 
miserable sinner, and so are you." If he is a psychotherapist, he is 
more likely to start with the equally incredible idea that HE really 
believes in attack, and so does the patient, but it does not matter in 
EITHER case. 


T 9 D 2. 
We have repeatedly stated that beliefs of the ego CANNOT 
be shared, and THIS IS WHY THEY ARE NOT REAL. 
How, then, 
can UNCOVERING them MAKE them real? Every healer who 
searches fantasies for truth MUST be unhealed, because he DOES 
NOT KNOW WHERE TO LOOK FOR TRUTH, and therefore does 
not have the answer to the problem of healing. 
There IS an advan¬ 
tage to bringing nightmares into awareness, but ONLY to teach that 
they are NOT real, and that ANYTHING they contain is meaning¬ 
less. 
The unhealed healer cannot DO this, because he does not BE¬ 
LIEVE it. 


T 9 D 3. 
All unhealed healers follow the ego's plan for forgiveness, in 
one form or another. 
If they are theologians, they are likely to con¬ 
demn THEMSELVES, TEACH condemnation, and advocate a very 

389 Several words are crossed out here and are illegible, but may have included “AWARENESS of 
reality.” The Notes has it as it stands here. 



355 


1-345 




Volume I Text 


fearful solution. 
Projecting condemnation onto God, they make Him 
retaliative, and FEAR HIS RETRIBUTION. 
What they have done is 
merely to IDENTIFY with the ego, and by perceiving clearly what IT 
does, condemn THEMSELVES because of this profound confusion. 


T 9 D 4. 
It is understandable that there has been a revolt against this 
concept, but to revolt AGAINST it, is still to BELIEVE in it. 
The 
FORM of the revolt, then, is different, but NOT the content. 
T(393) - 
220 The new form of the ego's plan is as unhelpful as the older one, 
because form does not matter to the Holy Spirit, and therefore 
DOES NOT MATTER AT ALL. 
According to the newer forms of the 
plan, the therapist interprets the ego's symbols IN the nightmare, 
and uses them to PROVE THE NIGHTMARE IS REAL. 
Having 
MADE it real, he then attempts to dispel its EFFECTS by DEPRECI¬ 
ATING THE IMPORTANCE OF THE DREAMER. 


T 9 D 5. 
This WOULD be a healing approach, IF THE DREAMER 
were properly identified AS UNREAL. 
But if the dreamer is equated 
WITH the mind, the mind's corrective power, through the Holy 
Spirit, is DENIED. 
It is noteworthy that this is a contradiction even 
in the ego's own terms, and one which it usually DOES note, even in 
its confusion. 
If the way to counteract fear is to reduce the impor¬ 
tance of the FEARER, how can this build up ego STRENGTH? These 
perfectly self-evident inconsistencies account for why, except for 
certain stylized verbal accounts, NOBODY can EXPLAIN what hap¬ 
pens in psychotherapy. 
Nothing real DOES. 


T 9 D 6. 
Nothing REAL has happened to the unhealed healer, and HE 
LEARNS FROM HIS OWN TEACHING. 
BECAUSE his ego is in¬ 
volved, it ALWAYS attempts to gain some support from the situa¬ 
tion. 
Seeking to GET something for HIMSELF, the healer does NOT 
know how to give, and consequently CANNOT SHARE. 
He CAN¬ 
NOT correct, because he is not working CORRECTIVELY. 
He be¬ 
lieves that it is up to him to teach the patient what is REAL, but he 
does not know it HIMSELF. 



1-346 


356 





Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


T 9 D 7. 
What, then, SHOULD happen? When God said: "Let there be 
Light," 390 there WAS light. 
Can you find light by ANALYZING 
darkness as the psychotherapist does, or like the theologian, by 
ACKNOWLEDGING it in yourself, and looking for a distant light to 
remove it, while emphasizing the distance? T(394) -221 

T 9 D 8. 
Healing is NOT mysterious. 
Nothing occurs UNLESS you 
understand it, since light IS understanding. 
A "miserable sinner" 
cannot be healed without magic, nor can an "unimportant mind" 
esteem itself without magic. 
Both forms of the ego's approach, then, 
MUST arrive at an impasse, the characteristic "impossible situation" 
to which the ego ALWAYS leads. 


T 9 D 9. 
It CAN be helpful to point out to a patient WHERE HE IS 
HEADING, but the point is LOST unless he can change his direc¬ 
tion. 
The therapist cannot do this for him, but he also CANNOT DO 
THIS FOR HIMSELF. 
His only MEANINGFUL contribution is to 
present an example of one whose direction has been changed FOR 
him, and who NO LONGER BELIEVES IN NIGHTMARES OF ANY 
KIND. 
The light in HIS mind will therefore ANSWER the ques¬ 
tioner, who MUST decide with God that there IS light BECAUSE HE 
SEES IT. 
And by HIS acknowledgment, THE THERAPIST KNOWS 
IT IS THERE. 


T 9 D 10. 
That is how perception ultimately is translated into knowl¬ 
edge. 
The miracle-worker begins by PERCEIVING light, and trans¬ 
lates HIS perception into sureness by continually extending it, and 
ACCEPTING ITS ACKNOWLEDGMENT. 
Its EFFECTS assure him 
IT IS THERE. 
The therapist does not heal; he LETS HEALING BE. 

HE can point to darkness, but he CANNOT bring light OF HIM¬ 
SELF, for light is NOT of him. 
But being FOR him, it MUST be for 
his patient. 


T 9 D ll. 
The Holy Spirit is the ONLY therapist. 
He makes healing 
PERFECTLY clear in ANY situation in which He is the guide. 
391 The 


, ' ::i Genesis 1:3 Then God said, “Let there be light”; and there was light. 


191 This possibly should be capitalized, but it is not capitalized in the Notes. 



357 


1-347 



Volume I Text 


human therapist can only LET HIM FULFILL HIS FUNCTION. 
He 
needs no help for this. 
He WILL tell you EXACTLY what to do, to 
help ANYONE He sends to you FOR help, and will speak to him 
through you, IF YOU DO NOT INTERFERE. 
Remember that you 
T(395) -222 ARE choosing a guide for helping, and the wrong choice 
will NOT help. 
But remember also that THE RIGHT ONE WILL. 

Trust Him, for help is His function, and He is of God. 


T 9 D 12. 
As you awaken other minds TO Him through HIM, and not 
yourself, you will understand that you are not obeying the laws of 
this world, but that the laws you ARE obeying WORK. 
"The good is 
what works" is a sound though insufficient statement. 
ONLY the 
good CAN work. 
Nothing else works at all. 
This course is a guide to 
behavior. 
Being a very direct and very simple learning situation, it 
provides the guide who tells you what to do. 
If you do it, you will 
SEE that it works. 
Its RESULTS are more convincing than its words. 

THEY will convince you that the words are true. 


T 9 D 13. 
By following the right Guide, you will learn the simplest of 
all lessons: "By their fruits ye shall know them, 392 and THEY shall 
know THEMSELVES." T(396) 223 

T 9 E. 
The Awareness of the Holy Spirit (Notes 854 7:186) 

T 9 E l. 
How can you become increasingly aware of the Holy Spirit in 
you, EXCEPT by His EFFECTS? You cannot see Him with your eyes, 
nor hear Him with your ears. 
How, then, can you perceive Him at 
all? 393 If you INSPIRE joy, and others react to you WITH joy, even 
though you are not experiencing joy yourself, there must be SOME¬ 
THING IN YOU that IS CAPABLE OF PRODUCING IT. 
If it is in 
YOU, and CAN produce joy, and if you see that it DOES produce 
joy in others, you MUST be dissociating it in yourself. 



392 Matthew 7:16- 20 “By their fruits ye shall know them. 
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of 
thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but the corrupt tree bringeth forth evil fruit. 

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 
Every tree 
that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. 


Therefore by their fruits ye shall know them.” 

393 Urtext manuscript obscured after “Him at al ...” The “1?” is reconstructed from the Notes. 



1-348 


358 




Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


T 9 E 2. 
It seems to you that the Holy Spirit does not produce joy con¬ 
sistently in you, ONLY because YOU DO NOT CONSISTENTLY 
AROUSE JOY IN OTHERS. 
Their reactions to you ARE your evalua¬ 
tions of His consistency. 
When you are inconsistent, you will not 
always GIVE RISE to joy, and so you will not always recognize HIS 
consistency. 
What you offer to your brother, you offer to Him, 394 be¬ 
cause He cannot GO BEYOND your offering in HIS giving. 
This is 
NOT because HE limits His giving, but simply because YOU have 
limited your RECEIVING. 


T 9 E 3. 
The will to receive is the will to accept. 
If your brothers ARE 
part of you, will you ACCEPT them? Only they can teach you what 
you are, and your learning is the result of what you taught THEM. 

What you call upon in them, you call upon in YOURSELF. 
And as 
you call upon it IN THEM, it becomes real to YOU. 
God has but one 
Son, knowing them all as One. 
Only God Himself is more than they, 
but they are not less than He is. 
Would you know what this means? 
If what you do to my brother you do to me, 395 and if you do every¬ 
thing for yourself because we are PART of you, everything WE do 
belongs to you as well. 
Every Soul God created is part of you, and 
shares His glory WITH you. 
T(397) -224 396 

T 9 E 4. 
His glory belongs to Him, but it is equally YOURS. 
You can¬ 
not, then, BE less glorious than He is. 
He is more than you ONLY 
because He CREATED you, but not even this would He keep from 
you. 
Therefore, you CAN create as He did, and YOUR dissociation 
WILL NOT ALTER THIS. 
Neither God's Light nor YOURS is 
dimmed because you do not see. 


T 9 E 5. 
Because the Sonship MUST create as one, you remember 
creation whenever you recognize part of creation. 
Each part you 
remember adds to YOUR wholeness, because each part IS whole. 

Wholeness is indivisible, but you cannot learn YOUR wholeness. 



,tl4 Matthew 25:40 And the King will answer and say to them, “Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as 
you did it to one of the least of these My brethren, you did it to Me.’ 

395 Matthew 25:40 “And the King will answer and say to them, “Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as 
you did it to one of the least of these My brethren, you did it to Me.’“ 

396 Paragraphation in doubt, it is not certain a new paragraph should begin here. 



359 


1-349 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume I Text 


UNTIL YOU SEE IT EVERYWHERE. 
You can know yourself only as 
God knows His Son, for KNOWLEDGE is shared WITH God. 
When 
you awake in Him, you will know your magnitude by accepting HIS 
limitlessness as YOURS. 
But meanwhile, you will judge it as you 
judge your brothers', and will accept it as you accept theirs. 


T 9 E 6. 
You are not yet awake, but you can learn HOW to awaken. 

Very simply the Holy Spirit teaches you to awaken others. 
As you 
see them waken, you will learn WHAT WAKING MEANS. 
And be¬ 
cause you have willed to wake them, their gratitude, and their ap¬ 
preciation of what you have given them, will TEACH YOU ITS 
VALUE. 
THEY will become the witnesses to your reality, as YOU 
were created witnesses to God's. 
But when the Sonship COMES 
TOGETHER and accepts its oneness, it will be known by ITS crea¬ 
tions, who witness to its reality, as the Son does to the Father. 


T 9 E 7. 
Miracles have no place in eternity because they are repara¬ 
tive. 
But while you still need healing, your miracles are the only 
witnesses to your reality THAT YOU CAN RECOGNIZE. 
T(398) - 225 
-You cannot perform a miracle FOR YOURSELF, because miracles 
are a way of GIVING ACCEPTANCE AND receiving it. 
In TIME, 
the giving comes FIRST, though they are simultaneous in eternity, 
where they cannot BE separated. 
When you have learned that they 
ARE the same, the need for time is over. 
Eternity is ONE time, its 
ONLY dimension being "always." 

T 9 E 8. 
But this cannot mean anything to you, until you remember 
God's open arms, and finally know His open Mind. 
Like Him, YOU 
are ALWAYS, in His Mind, and with a mind like His. 
In your open 
mind are YOUR creations, in perfect communication, born of perfect 
understanding. 
Could you but accept one of them, you would not 
want ANYTHING the world has to offer. 
Everything else would be 
totally meaningless. 
God's meaning is incomplete without you, and 
you are incomplete without your creations. 


T 9 E 9. 
Accept your brother in this world, and accept NOTHING 
ELSE, for in him you will find your creations, because he created 


1-350 


360 


Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


them WITH you. 
You will never know that you are co-creator with 
God, until you learn that your brother is a co-creator with YOU. 


T 9 F. 
Salvation and God's Will (Notes 858 7:190) 

T 9 F l. 
God's Will is your salvation. 
Would He not have given you 
the means to find it? If He wills you to HAVE it. 
He MUST have 
made it possible, and very easy to obtain it. 


T 9 F 2. 
Your brothers are everywhere. 
You do not have to seek far for 
salvation. 
Every minute and every second gives you a chance to 
save YOURSELF. 
Do not lose these chances, NOT because they will 
not return, but because delay of joy is needless. 
God wills you per¬ 
fect happiness NOW. 
Is it possible that this is not also YOUR will? 
And is it possible that this is not ALSO the will of your brothers? 
Consider, then, that in this joint will, you ARE all united, and IN 
THIS ONLY. 
There WILL be disagreement on anything ELSE, but 
NOT in this. 
This, then, is where peace ABIDES. 
And YOU abide in 
peace, when you so decide. 
T(399) - 226 - 

T 9 F 3. 
But you cannot abide in peace unless you accept the Atone¬ 
ment, because the Atonement IS the way to peace. 
The reason is 
very simple, and so obvious that it is often overlooked. 
That is be¬ 
cause the ego is AFRAID of the obvious, since obviousness is the 
essential characteristic of reality. 
You CANNOT overlook it, unless 
you are NOT LOOKING. 
It is PERFECTLY obvious that if the Holy 
Spirit looks with love on all He perceives. 
He looks with love on 
YOU. 
His EVALUATION of you is based on his 397 knowledge of 
what you ARE, and so He evaluates you truly. 
And this evaluation 
MUST be in your mind, because HE is. 


T 9 F 4. 
The ego is also in your mind, because you have ACCEPTED it 
there. 
ITS evaluation of you, however, is the exact opposite of the 
Holy Spirit's, because the ego does NOT love you. 
It is unaware of 
what you are, and wholly mistrustful of EVERYTHING it perceives, 
because its own perceptions are so shifting. 
The ego is therefore ca- 


,cl7 The pronoun “his” refers to the deity and should probably be capitalized. 
The Notes omits the word 
entirely. 



361 


1-351 



Volume I Text 


pable of suspiciousness at best, and viciousness at worst. 
That is its 
range. 
It cannot exceed it, because of its uncertainty. 
And it can 
never go BEYOND it, because it can never BE certain. 


T 9 F 5. 
You, then, have two conflicting evaluations of yourself in 
your minds, and they CANNOT BOTH BE TRUE. 
You do not yet 
realize how COMPLETELY different these evaluations are, because 
you do not understand how lofty the Holy Spirit's perception of you 
really is. 
He is not deceived by ANYTHING you do, because He 
NEVER forgets what you are. 
The ego is deceived by EVERYTHING 
you do, even when you respond to the Holy Spirit, because at such 
times ITS CONFUSION INCREASES. 
The ego is, therefore, particu¬ 
larly likely to attack you when you react lovingly, because it has 
evaluated you AS UNLOVING, and you are going AGAINST ITS 
JUDGMENT. 


T 9 F 6. 
The ego will begin to ATTACK your motives as soon as they 
become clearly out of accord with its perception of you. 
This is 
when it will shift abruptly from suspiciousness to viciousness, be¬ 
cause its uncertainty is T(400) - 227 INCREASED. 
But it is surely 
pointless to attack in return. 
What can this mean, except that you are 
AGREEING with the ego's evaluation of what you are? If you are 
willing to see yourself as unloving, YOU WILL NOT BE HAPPY. 

You are condemning yourself, and MUST therefore regard yourself 
as inadequate. 


T 9 F 7. 
Would you look to the ego to help you escape from a sense of 
inadequacy it has PRODUCED, and must MAINTAIN for its own 
existence? Can you ESCAPE from its evaluation of you, by using its 
methods for keeping this picture INTACT? You cannot evaluate an 
insane belief system from WITHIN it. 
Its own range precludes this. 

You can only GO BEYOND it, and look back from a point where 
SANITY exists, and SEE THE CONTRAST. 
Only BY this contrast, 
can insanity be judged as insane. 


T 9 F 8. 
With the grandeur of God in you, you have chosen to be little, 
and lament your littleness. 
Within the system which DICTATED 
this choice, the lament IS inevitable. 
Your littleness is TAKEN FOR 


1-352 


362 


Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


GRANTED there, and you do NOT ask who granted it. 
The question 
is meaningless WITHIN the ego's thought-system, because it 
OPENS THE WHOLE THOUGHT-SYSTEM TO QUESTION. 
We 
said before that the ego does not know what a real question is. 
Lack 
of knowledge of ANY kind is ALWAYS associated with UNWILL¬ 
INGNESS to know, and produces a TOTAL lack of knowledge, sim¬ 
ply because KNOWLEDGE is total. 
NOT to question your littleness 
is, therefore, to deny ALL knowledge, and keep the ego's WHOLE 
thought-system intact. 


T 9 F 9. 
You cannot retain PART of a thought-system, because it can 
BE questioned only at its foundation. 
And this MUST be questioned 
from beyond it, because WITHIN it, its foundation DOES stand. 
The 
Holy Spirit judges against the reality of the ego's thought-system, 
merely because He knows its FOUNDATION is not true. 
Therefore, 
nothing that arises from it MEANS anything. 
The Holy Spirit judges 
every belief you hold in terms of where it comes from. 
If it comes 
from God, T(40l) -228 He knows it to be true. 
If it does not. 
He knows 
it is meaningless. 


T 9 F10. 
Whenever you question your value, say, "God Himself is 
incomplete without me." Remember this when the ego speaks, and 
you will not hear it. 
The truth about YOU is so lofty that nothing 
that is unworthy of God is worthy of you. 
Choose, then, what you 
want in these terms, and accept nothing that you would not offer to 
God as wholly fitting for HIM, for YOU do not want anything else. 

Return your part of Him, and He will give you all of Himself, in ex¬ 
change for your return of what belongs to Him, and renders Him 
complete. 


T 9 G. 
Grandeur versus Grandiosity (Notes 865 7:197) 

T 9 G 1 . 
Grandeur is of God, and ONLY of Him. 
Therefore, it is in 
you. 
Whenever you become aware of it, however dimly, you aban¬ 
don the ego automatically, because in the presence of the grandeur 
of God, the meaninglessness of the ego becomes perfectly apparent. 

Though it does not understand this, the ego believes that its "en¬ 
emy" has struck, and attempts to offer gifts to induce you to return 


363 


1-353 


Volume I Text 


to its protection. 
SELF-inflation is the only offering it can make. 
The 
grandiosity of the ego is its alternative to the grandeur of God. 

Which will you choose? 

T 9 G 2. 
Grandiosity is ALWAYS a cover for despair. 
It is without 
hope, because it is not real. 
It is an attempt to COUNTERACT your 
littleness, based on the belief THAT THE LITTLENESS IS REAL. 

WITHOUT this belief, the grandiosity is meaningless, and you could 
not possibly WANT it. 
The essence of grandiosity is competitive¬ 
ness, because it ALWAYS involves ATTACK. 
It is a delusional at¬ 
tempt to OUTDO, but NOT to UNdo. 
We said before that the ego 
vacillates between suspiciousness and viciousness. 
It remains suspi¬ 
cious as long as you DESPAIR of yourself. 
It shifts to viciousness 
whenever you will not tolerate self-debasement, and seek relief. 

Then it offers you the delusion of ATTACK as a solution. 
T(402) -229 
T 9 G 3. 
The ego does not know the difference between grandeur and 
grandiosity, because it does not know the difference between mira¬ 
cle-impulses and ego-alien beliefs of its own. 
We once said that the 
ego IS aware of threat, but does NOT make distinctions between 
two ENTIRELY different kinds of threat to its existence. 
Its own 
PROFOUND sense of vulnerability renders it incapable of judg¬ 
ment, EXCEPT in terms of attack. 
When it experiences threat, its 
ONLY decision is whether to attack NOW, or withdraw to attack 
later. 
If you ACCEPT its offer of grandiosity, it will attack immedi¬ 
ately. 
If you do not, it will wait. 


T 9 G 4. 
The ego is immobilized in the presence of God's grandeur, 
because HIS grandeur establishes YOUR freedom. 
Even the faintest 
hint of your reality literally drives the ego from your mind, because 
of the complete lack of investment in it. 
Grandeur is totally WITH¬ 
OUT illusion, and because it is real, it is compellingly convincing. 

But the conviction of reality will not REMAIN with you, UNLESS 
YOU DO NOT ALLOW THE EGO TO ATTACK IT. 


T 9 G 5. 
The ego will make every effort to recover, and mobilize its 
energies AGAINST your release. 
It will tell you that you are insane, 
and argue that grandeur CANNOT be a real part of you, because of 


1-354 


364 


Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


the littleness in which IT believes. 
But your grandeur is NOT delu¬ 
sional, BECAUSE YOU DID NOT MAKE IT. 
YOU have made gran¬ 
diosity, and are afraid of it, because it is a form of ATTACK. 
But 
your grandeur is of God, who created it out of His love. 
From your 
grandeur you can only bless, because your grandeur is your 
ABUNDANCE. 
By blessing you hold it in your minds, protecting it 
from illusions, and keeping yourself in the Mind of God. 


T 9 G 6. 
Remember always that you cannot be anywhere EXCEPT in 
the Mind of God. 
When you FORGET this, you WILL despair, and 
you WILL attack. 
The ego depends SOLELY on your willingness to 
tolerate it. 
But if you are willing to look upon your grandeur, you 
CANNOT despair, and therefore you CANNOT want the ego. 
Your 
grandeur is God's ANSWER to the ego, because it is true. 
T(403) -230 
Littleness and grandeur cannot co-exist, nor is it possible for them to 
alternate in your awareness. 
Littleness and grandiosity can and 
MUST, since both are untrue, and therefore on the same level. 
Being 
the level of shift, it is experienced as shifting, and extremes are its 
essential characteristic. 


T 9 G 7. 
But truth and littleness are DENIALS of each other, and 
grandeur IS truth. 
Truth does not vacillate; it is ALWAYS true. 


When grandeur slips away from you, YOU HAVE REPLACED IT 
WITH SOMETHING YOU HAVE MADE. 
Perhaps it is the belief in 
littleness; perhaps it is the belief in grandiosity. 
But it MUST be in¬ 
sane, because it is NOT TRUE. 
Your grandeur will NEVER deceive 
you, but your illusions ALWAYS will. 
Illusions ARE deceptions. 


T 9 G 8. 
You CANNOT triumph, but you ARE exalted. 
And in your 
exalted state, you seek others like you, and rejoice with them. 
It is 
easy to distinguish grandeur from grandiosity, simply because love 
is returned, but pride is not. 
Pride will not produce miracles, and 
therefore will deprive you of the true witnesses to your reality. 


Truth is not obscure nor hidden, but its obviousness to YOU lies in 
the joy you bring to its witnesses, WHO SHOW IT TO YOU. 
They 
attest to your grandeur, but they cannot attest to pride because 
pride is not shared. 



365 


1-355 


Volume I Text 


T 9 G 9. 
God WANTS you to behold what He created, because it is 
HIS joy. 
Can your grandeur be arrogant, when God HIMSELF wit¬ 
nesses to it? And what can be real that has NO witnesses? What 
good can come of it? And if no good can come of it, the Holy Spirit 
cannot use it. 
What He cannot TRANSFORM to the Will of God 
does not exist at all. 
Grandiosity is delusional because it is used to 
REPLACE your grandeur. 
Yet what God has created cannot BE re¬ 
placed. 
T(404) -231 

T 9 G 10. 
God is incomplete without you, simply because His gran¬ 
deur is total, and you cannot BE missing from it. 
You are altogether 
irreplaceable in the Mind of God. 
No one else can fill your part of it, 
and while you leave your part of it empty, your eternal place merely 
waits for your return. 
God, through His Voice, reminds you of it, 
and God Himself keeps your extensions safe within it. 
But YOU do 
not know them, until you return TO them. 


T 9 G ll. 
You CANNOT replace the Kingdom, and you cannot re¬ 
place yourself. 
God, Who KNOWS your value, would not have it so, 
and so it is NOT so. 
Your value is in GOD's Mind, and therefore 
NOT in yours alone. 
To accept yourself as He created you CANNOT 
be arrogant, because it is the DENIAL of arrogance. 
To accept your 
littleness IS arrogant, because it means that you believe that YOUR 
evaluation of yourself is TRUER THAN GOD's. 
But if truth is indi¬ 
visible, then YOUR evaluation of yourself MUST BE GOD's. 


T 9 G 12. 
You did not ESTABLISH your value, and it needs no de¬ 
fense. 
NOTHING can attack it, or prevail over it. 
It does not vary. 
It 
merely IS. 
Ask the Holy Spirit WHAT it is, and He will tell you. 
But 
do not be afraid of His Answer, for it comes from God. 
It IS an ex¬ 
alted answer, because of its Source. 
But the Source is true, and so is 
its answer. 
Listen and do not question what you hear, for God does 
not deceive. 
He would have you replace the ego's belief in littleness 
with His own exalted answer to the question of your being, so that 
you can cease to question it, and KNOW it for what it IS. 
T(405) - 232 - 


1-356 


366 


Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 

T 9 H. 
The Inclusiveness of Creation (Notes 873 7:205) 

T 9 H l. 
NOTHING beyond yourself can make you fearful or loving, 
because nothing IS beyond you. 
Time and eternity are both in your 
minds, and WILL conflict, until you perceive time SOLELY as a 
means to REGAIN eternity. 
You cannot do this, as long as you be¬ 
lieve that ANYTHING that happens to you is caused by factors 
OUTSIDE yourself. 
You must learn that time is solely at YOUR dis¬ 
posal, and that nothing in the world can take this responsibility 
FROM you. 
You can VIOLATE God's laws in your imagination, but 
you cannot escape from them. 
They were established for your pro¬ 
tection, and are as inviolate as your safety. 


T 9 H 2. 
God created nothing beside you, and nothing beside you ex¬ 
ists, for you are part of Him. 
What except Him CAN exist? Nothing 
BEYOND Him can happen, because nothing EXCEPT Him is real. 

YOUR creations add to Him, as YOU do. 
But nothing is added that 
is different, because everything has always BEEN. 
What can upset 
you except the ephemeral, and how can the ephemeral be real, if 
you are God's ONLY creation, and He created you eternal? 

T 9 H 3. 
Your holy will establishes EVERYTHING that happens to 
you. 
Every response you make, to everything you perceive, is up to 
you, because your will DETERMINES your perception of it. 
God 
does not change His Mind about YOU, for He is not uncertain of 
HIMSELF. 
And what He knows CAN be known, because He does 
not know only for Himself. 
He CREATED you for Himself, but He 
gave you the power to create for YOUR self, so you would be LIKE 
Him. 
That is why your will is holy. 


T 9 H 4. 
Can anything EXCEED the love of God? Can anything, then, 
exceed YOUR will? Nothing can reach you from BEYOND it, be¬ 
cause being in God, YOU encompass everything. 
Believe this, and 
you will realize how much IS up to you. 
When ANYTHING threat¬ 
ens your peace of mind, ask yourself "Has God changed His Mind 
about me?" Then ACCEPT His decision, for it is indeed changeless, 
and refuse to change your mind about YOURSELF. 
T(406) - 233 - God 


367 


1-357 


Volume I Text 


will never decide AGAINST you, or He would be deciding against 
Himself. 


T 9 H 5. 
The reason you do not know YOUR creations is simply that 
you would decide against them, as long as your minds are split, and 
to attack what you have created is impossible. 
But remember that IT 
IS AS IMPOSSIBLE FOR GOD. 
The law of Creation is that you love 
your creations as yourself, BECAUSE THEY ARE PART OF YOU. 
398 
Everything that was created is therefore PERFECTLY safe, because 
the laws of God protect it by His love. 
Any part of your mind that 
does not know this, has banished itself from knowledge, because it 
has NOT MET ITS CONDITIONS. 


T 9 H 6. 
Who could have done this but you? Recognize this gladly, for 
in this recognition lies the realization that your banishment is not of 
God, 399 and therefore does not exist. 
You are at home in God, dream¬ 
ing of exile, but perfectly capable of awakening to Reality. 
Is it your 
will to do so? You know, from your own experience, that what you 
see in dreams you think is real, as long as you are asleep. 
But the 
instant you waken, you KNOW that everything that SEEMED to 
happen DID NOT HAPPEN AT ALL. 
You do not think this myste¬ 
rious, even though ALL the laws of what you awake to WERE vio¬ 
lated while you slept. 


T 9 H 7. 
Is it not possible that you merely shifted from one dream to 
another without really wakening? Would you bother to reconcile 
what happened in conflicting DREAMS, or would you dismiss 
BOTH TOGETHER, if you discovered that REALITY is in accord 
with neither? You do not remember being awake. 
When you hear 
the Holy Spirit, you merely feel BETTER, because loving seems 
POSSIBLE to you. 
But you do NOT remember yet that it once was 
so, and it is in this remembering that you will know it can be so 
again. 



398 Leviticus 19:18 You shall not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the children of your 
people, but you shall love your neighbor as yourself: I am the LORD. 


399 Genesis 3:23-24 Therefore the LORD God sent him out of the garden of Eden to till the ground from 
which he was taken. 
So He drove out the man; and He placed cherubim at the east of the garden of 
Eden, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to guard the way to the tree of life. 



1-358 


368 


PROOF 


COPY 



Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


T 9 H 8. 
What is possible has not yet been accomplished. 
But what has 
once been is so now, if it is eternal. 
When you remember, you will 
know what you remember IS eternal, and therefore is NOW. 
T(407) - 
234- 

T 9 H 9. 
You will remember everything the instant you DESIRE IT 
WHOLLY, for if to desire wholly is to create, you will have willed 
away the separation, returning your mind simultaneously to your 
Creator and your creations. 
Knowing them, you will have no wish 
to sleep, but only the will to waken and be glad. 
Dreams will be im¬ 
possible, because you will WANT only truth, and being at last your 
will, it will be yours. 


T 9 I. 
The Decision to Forget (Notes 877 7:209) 

T 911. 
Unless you KNOW something, you CANNOT dissociate it. 

Knowledge therefore PRECEDES dissociation, and dissociation is 
nothing more than a DECISION TO FORGET. 
What has been FOR¬ 
GOTTEN then appears to be fearful, but ONLY because the disso¬ 
ciation was an ATTACK ON TRUTH. 
You are fearful BECAUSE y ou 
have forgotten. 
And you have REPLACED your knowledge by an 
awareness of dreams, BECAUSE YOU ARE AFRAID OF YOUR 
DISSOCIATION, NOT of what you have dissociated. 
Even in this 
world's therapy, when dissociated material is ACCEPTED, it ceases 
to be fearful, for the laws of mind always hold. 


T 912 . 
But to give up the dissociation of REALITY brings more than 
merely lack of fear. 
In THIS decision lie joy, and peace, and the 
glory of creation. 
Offer the Holy Spirit only your will to remember, 
for He retains the knowledge of God and of you FOR you, waiting 
for your acceptance. 
Give up gladly EVERYTHING that would 
stand in the way of your remembering, for God is in your memory, 
and His Voice will tell you that you are part of Him when you are 
willing to remember Him and know your own reality again. 
Let 
nothing in this world delay your remembering of Him, for in this 
remembering is the knowledge of YOURSELF. 


T 913. 
To remember is merely to restore to your mind WHAT IS 
ALREADY THERE. 
You do not make what you remember; you 


369 


1-359 



Volume I Text 


merely accept again what has BEEN made AND REJECTED. 
The 
ability to ACCEPT truth in this world is the perceptual counterpart 
of creating in the Kingdom. 
God WILL do His part T(408) - 235 - if you 
will do yours, and HIS return in exchange for yours IS the exchange 
of knowledge for perception. 
NOTHING is beyond His will for you. 

But signify your will to remember Him, and behold! He will give 
you everything but for your asking. 


T 914. 
Whenever you attack, you are denying YOURSELF. 
You are 
specifically teaching yourself that you are NOT what you are. 
YOUR 
denial of reality precludes ACCEPTANCE of God's gift, BECAUSE 
YOU HAVE ACCEPTED SOMETHING ELSE IN ITS PLACE. 
If you 
understand that the misuse of defenses always constitutes an attack 
on truth, and truth is God, you will realize why this is ALWAYS 
fearful. 
If you further recognize that you are PART of God, you will 
also understand why it is that YOU ALWAYS ATTACK YOURSELF 
FIRST. 


T 915. 
ALL attack is self attack. 
It cannot BE anything else. 
Arising 
from your OWN decision NOT to be what you ARE, IT IS AN AT¬ 
TACK ON YOUR IDENTIFICATION. 
Attack is thus the way in 
which your identification is lost, because, when you attack, you 
MUST have forgotten what you are. 
And if your reality is God's, 
when YOU attack, you are not remembering HIM. 
This is not be¬ 
cause He is gone, but because you are ACTIVELY WILLING NOT 
TO REMEMBER HIM. 


T 916 . 
If you realized the complete havoc this makes of your peace of 
mind, you COULD not make such an insane decision. 
You make it 
only because you still believe that it can GET YOU SOMETHING 
YOU WANT. 
It follows, then, that you want something OTHER 
than peace of mind, and you have not considered what it must be. 

Yet the logical outcome of your decision is perfectly clear, if you will 
LOOK at it. 
By deciding AGAINST your reality, you have made 
yourself vigilant AGAINST God and His Kingdom. 
And it is THIS 
vigilance that makes you afraid to remember Him. 
T(409) - 236 - 


1-360 


370 



Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


T 9 1 7. 
You have NOT attacked God, and you DO love Him. 
Can you 
change your reality? No-one can will to destroy himself. 
When you 
think you are attacking your SELF, it is a sure sign that you hate 
what you think you are. 
And this, and ONLY this, can BE attacked 
by you. 
What you THINK you are CAN be hateful, and what this 
strange image makes you do can be very destructive. 
The destruc¬ 
tion is no more real than the image, but those who make idols DO 
worship them. 
The idols are nothing, but their worshippers are the 
Sons of God in sickness. 


T 918. 
God would have them released from their sickness, and re¬ 
turned to His Mind. 
He will not limit your power to help them, be¬ 
cause He has given it TO you. 
Do not be afraid of it, because it is 
your salvation. 
What Comforter 400 can there be for the sick children 
of God except His power through YOU? Remember that it does not 
matter where in the Sonship He is accepted. 
He is ALWAYS ac¬ 
cepted for all, and when your mind receives Him, the remembrance 
of Him awakens throughout the Sonship. 


T 9 1 9. 
Heal your brothers simply by accepting God FOR them. 
Your 
minds are not separate, and God has only one channel for healing, 
because He has but one Son. 
His remaining communication link 
with all His Children joins them together, and them to Him. 
To be 
aware of this is to heal them, because it is the awareness that no one 
is separate, and so no one is sick. 
To believe that a Son of God can be 
sick is to believe that PART OF GOD CAN SUFFER. 


T 91 o. 
Love CANNOT suffer, because it cannot attack. 
The remem¬ 
brance of love therefore brings invulnerability with it. 
Do not side 
with sickness in the presence of a Son of God, even if HE believes in 
it, for YOUR acceptance of God in him ACKNOWLEDGES the love 
of God which he has forgotten. 
Your recognition of him as PART OF 
GOD teaches him the truth about himself, WHICH HE IS DENY¬ 
ING. 
Would you STRENGTHEN his denial of God, and thus lose 


4110 John 14:16 “And I will pray the Father, and He will give you another Helper, that He may abide 
with you forever.” 


371 


1-361 



Volume I Text 


sight of YOURSELF? Or would you remind him of his wholeness, 
and remember your Creator WITH him? 

T 91 li. 
To believe a Son of God is sick is to worship the same idol he 
does. 
God created love, NOT idolatry. 
ALL forms of idolatry are 
caricatures of T(410) - 237 - creation, taught by sick minds, who are too 
divided to know that Creation SHARES power, and NEVER usurps 
it. 
Sickness is idolatry, because it is the belief that POWER CAN BE 
TAKEN FROM YOU. 
But this is impossible, because you are part of 
God, Who IS all power. 
A sick god MUST be an idol, made in the 
image of what its maker thinks HE is. 
And that is exactly what the 
ego DOES perceive in a Son of God; -- a sick god, self-created, self- 
sufficient, very vicious, and very vulnerable. 


T 9112. 
Is this the idol you would worship? Is this the image you 
would be vigilant to SAVE? Are you REALLY afraid of losing THIS? 
Look calmly at the logical conclusion of the ego's thought-system, 
and judge whether its offering is really what you want, for this IS 
what it offers you. 
To obtain THIS, you are willing to attack the Di¬ 
vinity of your brothers, and thus lose sight of YOURS. 
And you are 
willing to keep it hidden, to protect this idol, which you think will 
save you from dangers WHICH THE IDOL ITSELF STANDS FOR, 
but which do not exist. 


T 9113. 
There are no idolaters in the Kingdom, but there is great ap¬ 
preciation for every Soul which God created, because of the calm 
knowledge that each one is part of Him. 
God's Son knows no idols, 
but He DOES know His Father. 
Health in this world is the counter¬ 
part of value in Heaven. 
It is not my merit that I contribute to you, 
but my love, for you do not value yourselves. 
When you do not 
value yourself you become sick, but MY value of you can heal you, 
because the value of God's Son is one. 


T 9114. 
When I said, "my peace I give unto you," 401 1 meant it. 
Peace 
came from God through me to YOU. 
It was FOR you, but you did 


4111 John 14:27 “Peace I leave with you, My peace I give to you; not as the world gives do I give to you. 

Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.” 


1-362 


372 



Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


not ask. 
When a brother is sick, it is because HE IS NOT ASKING 
FOR PEACE, and therefore he does not know he HAS it. 
The AC¬ 
CEPTANCE of peace is the denial of illusion, and sickness IS an illu¬ 
sion. 
Yet every Son of God has the power to deny illusions ANY¬ 
WHERE in the Kingdom, merely by denying them completely in 
himself. 


T 9115. 
1 CAN heal you, because I KNOW you. 
I know your value 
FOR you, and it is this value that makes you whole. 
A whole mind 
is not idolatrous, and does not know of conflicting laws. 
I will heal 
you merely because I have only T(4ll) - 238 - ONE message, and it is 
true. 
Your faith in it will make you whole, 402 when you have faith in 
me. 
I do not bring God's message with deception, and you will learn 
this as you learn that you ALWAYS receive as much as you AC¬ 
CEPT. 
You could accept peace NOW, for everyone you meet, and 
offer them perfect freedom from ALL illusions, BECAUSE YOU 
HEARD. 
But have no other gods before Him, 403 or you will NOT 
hear. 


T 9116. 
God is not jealous 404 of the gods you make, but YOU are. 
You 
would save them and serve them, because you believe that THEY 
MADE YOU. 
You think they are your father, because you are pro¬ 
jecting onto them the fearful fact that YOU MADE THEM TO RE¬ 
PLACE GOD. 
But when they seem to speak to you, remember that 
NOTHING can replace God, and whatever replacements you have 
attempted ARE nothing. 
Very simply, then, you may BELIEVE you 
are afraid of nothingNESS, but you are REALLY afraid of NOTH¬ 
ING. 
And in THAT awareness you ARE healed. 


T 9117. 
You WILL hear the god you listen to. 
You MADE the god of 
sickness, and BY making him, you made yourself ABLE to hear him. 

But you did NOT create him, because he is NOT the Will of the Fa- 


102 Matthew 9:22 But Jesus turned around, and when He saw her He said, “Be of good cheer, daughter; 
your faith has made you whole.” And the woman was made well from that hour. 


403 Exodus 20:3 You shall have no other gods before Me. 


404 Exodus 20:5 You shall not bow down to them nor serve them. 
For I, the LORD your God, am a 
jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generations of 
those who hate Me, 


373 


1-363 



Volume I Text 


ther. 
He is therefore not eternal, and will be UNmade for you, the 
instant you signify your willingness to accept ONLY the eternal. 
If 
God has but one Son, there is but one God. 
You share reality with 
Him, BECAUSE reality is not divided. 
To accept other gods before 
Him, is to place other images before YOURSELF. 
You do not realize 
how much you listen to your gods, and how vigilant you are on 
their behalf. 
But they exist only because you honor them. 


T 9118. 
Place honor where it is due, and peace WILL be yours. 
It is 
your inheritance from your REAL Father. 
You cannot make your 
father, and the father you made did NOT make you. 
Honor is not 
due to illusions, for to honor them is to honor nothing. 
But fear is 
not due them either, for nothing cannot be fearful. 
You have chosen 
to fear love BECAUSE of its perfect harmlessness. 
And because of 
this fear, you have been willing to give up your own perfect help¬ 
fulness, and your own perfect Help. 
Only at the altar of God will 
you find peace, and this altar is in you, because God put it there. 
His 
Voice still calls T(412) - 239 - you to return, and He will be heard, when 
you place no other gods before Him. 


T 9119. 
You can give up the god of sickness for your brothers; in fact, 
you would HAVE to do so, if you give him up for yourself. 
For if 
you see him anywhere, YOU are accepting him. 
And if you accept 
him, you WILL bow down and worship him, because HE WAS 
MADE AS GOD's REPLACEMENT. 
He is the belief that YOU CAN 
CHOOSE WHICH GOD IS REAL. 
Although it is perfectly clear that 
this has nothing to do with REALITY, it is equally clear that it has 
EVERYTHING to do with REALITY AS YOU PERCEIVE IT. 
405 

T 9 J. 
Magic versus Miracles (Notes 890 7:221) 

T 9 J1. 
All magic is a form of reconciling the irreconcilable. 
All relig¬ 
ion is the recognition that the irreconcilable cannot BE reconciled. 


T 9 J 2. 
Sickness and perfection ARE irreconcilable. 
If God created 
you perfect, you ARE perfect. 
If you believe you can be sick, you 
HAVE placed other gods before Him. 
GOD is not at war with the 


405 [split paragraph] 


1-364 


374 



Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


god of sickness which you made, but YOU are. 
He is the symbol of 
willing AGAINST God, and you are afraid of him BECAUSE he 
cannot be reconciled with God's will. 
If you ATTACK him, you will 
make him real to you. 
But if you refuse to worship him, in whatever 
form he may appear to you, and wherever you think you see him, 
he will disappear into the nothingness out of which he was made. 


T 9 J 3. 
Reality can dawn only in an unclouded mind. 
It is always 
THERE, to BE accepted, but its acceptance depends on your WILL¬ 
INGNESS TO HAVE IT. 
To know reality MUST involve the willing¬ 
ness to judge Unreality FOR WHAT IT IS. 
This is the RIGHT use of 
selective perception. 
To overlook nothingness is merely to judge it 
correctly, and because of your ability to evaluate it truly, to LET IT 
GO. 
Knowledge cannot dawn on a mind full of illusions, because 
truth and illusions are irreconcilable. 
Truth is whole, and CANNOT 
be known by PART of a mind. 


T 9 J 4. 
The Sonship cannot be perceived as PARTLY sick, because to 
perceive it that way, is not to perceive it at all. 
If the Sonship is ONE, 
it is one in ALL respects. 
ONENESS CANNOT BE DIVIDED. 
If you 
perceive other gods, YOUR mind is split, and you will not be able to 
LIMIT the split, because the split IS the T(413) - 240 - sign that you 
have removed part of your mind from God's Will, and this MEANS 
that it is out of control. 
To be out of control is to be out of REASON, 
and the mind DOES become unreasonable without reason. 
This is 
merely a matter of DEFINITION. 
By DEFINING the mind wrongly, 
you perceive it as FUNCTIONING wrongly. 


T 9 J 5. 
God's laws will keep your minds at peace, because peace IS 
His Will, and His laws are established to uphold it. 
His are the laws 
of freedom, but yours are the laws of bondage. 
Since freedom and 
bondage are irreconcilable, their laws CANNOT BE UNDERSTOOD 
TOGETHER. 
The laws of God work only for your good, and there 
ARE no other laws beside His. 
Everything else is merely lawLESS, 
and therefore chaotic. 
But God Himself has protected EVERY¬ 
THING He created BY His laws. 
Therefore, everything that is not 
under them does not exist. 



375 


1-365 


Volume I Text 


T 9 J 6. 
"Laws of chaos" are meaningless, by definition. 
Creation is 
perfectly lawful, and the chaotic is without meaning, BECAUSE IT 
IS WITHOUT GOD. 
You have given your peace to the gods you 
made, but they are not there to take it FROM you, and you are NOT 
able to give it TO them. 
You are NOT free to give up freedom, but 
only to DENY it. 
YOU CANNOT DO WHAT GOD DID NOT IN¬ 
TEND, because what He did not intend DOES NOT HAPPEN. 
Your 
gods do not BRING chaos; you are ENDOWING them with chaos, 
and accepting it OF them. 


T 9 J 7. 
All this has never been. 
Nothing but the laws of God has ever 
operated, and nothing except His Will will ever be. 
You were cre¬ 
ated through His laws and by His Will, and the manner of your 
creation established you AS CREATORS. 
What you have made is so 
unworthy of you, that you could hardly want it, IF YOU WERE 
WILLING TO SEE IT AS IT IS. 
You will see nothing at all. 
And your 
vision will AUTOMATICALLY look beyond it, to what is IN you, 
and all AROUND you. 
Reality cannot BREAK THROUGH the ob¬ 
structions you interpose, but it WILL envelop you completely, 
WHEN YOU LET THEM GO. 


T 9 J 8. 
When you have experienced the protection of God, the mak¬ 
ing of idols becomes inconceivable. 
There are no strange images in 
the Mind of God, and what is not in His Mind CANNOT be in 
yours, because you are of One Mind, and that Mind T(414) - 241 - be¬ 
longs to HIM. 
It is yours BECAUSE it belongs to Him, for ownership 
is sharing to Him. 
And if it is so for Him, it is so for you. 
His defini¬ 
tions ARE His laws, for by them He established the universe as 
what it is. 
No false gods you attempt to interpose between yourself 
and your reality, affect truth at all. 
Peace is yours because God cre¬ 
ated you. 
And He created nothing else. 


T 9 J 9. 
The miracle is the act of a Son of God who has laid aside all 
false gods, and who calls on his brothers to do likewise. 
It is an act 
of faith, because it is the recognition that his brother CAN do it. 
It is 
a call to the Holy Spirit in his mind, a call to Him which is strength¬ 
ened by this joining. 
Because the miracle-worker has heard Him, he 


1-366 


376 


Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


strengthens His Voice in a sick brother by weakening his belief in 
sickness, which he does NOT share. 
The power of one mind CAN 
shine into another, because all the lamps of God were lit by the same 
spark. 
It is everywhere, and it is eternal. 


T 9 J 10. 
In many, only the spark remains, for the great rays are ob¬ 
scured. 
But God has kept the spark alive, so the rays can never be 
completely forgotten. 
If you but see the little spark, you will learn of 
the greater light, for the rays are there unseen. 
Perceiving the spark 
will heal, but knowing the Light will create. 
Yet in the returning, the 
little light must be acknowledged first, for the separation was a de¬ 
scent from magnitude to littleness. 
But the spark is still as pure as 
the Great Light, because it is the remaining call of Creation. 
Put all 
your faith in it, and God Himself will answer you. 
T(415) - 242 - 

T 9 K, The Denial of God (Notes 899 8:3) 

T 9 K 1. 
The rituals of the god of sickness are strange and very de¬ 
manding. 
Joy is never permitted, for depression is the sign of alle¬ 
giance to him. 
Depression MEANS that you have foresworn God. 

Men are afraid of blasphemy, but they do not know what it means. 

They do not realize that, to deny God, is to deny their own identity, 
and in this sense, the wages of sin IS death. 
406 The sense is very lit¬ 
eral; — denial of Life perceives its opposite, as ALL forms of denial 
replace what IS, with what is NOT. 
No-one can really DO this, but 
that you can THINK you can, and BELIEVE YOU HAVE, is beyond 
dispute. 


T 9 K 2. 
Do not forget, however, that to deny God will inevitably re¬ 
sult in projection, and you will believe that others, AND NOT 
YOURSELF, have done this TO you. 
You WILL receive the message 
you give, because it is the message you WANT. 
You may believe 
that you judge your brothers by the messages they give YOU, but 
you HAVE judged them by the message you give THEM. 
Do not 
attribute your denial of joy to them, or you cannot see the spark in 


4 '"’ Romans 6:23 For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 



377 


1-367 



Volume I Text 


them, that could bring joy to YOU. 
It is the DENIAL of the spark 
that brings depression, and whenever you see your brothers 
WITHOUT it, you ARE denying God. 


T 9 K 3. 
Allegiance to the denial of God is the ego's religion. 
The god 
of sickness obviously demands the denial of health, because health 
is in direct opposition to its own survival. 
But consider what this 
means to YOU. 
UNLESS you are sick you cannot keep the gods you 
made, for only in sickness could you possibly WANT them. 
Blas¬ 
phemy, then, is SELF-destructive, not God destructive. 
It means that 
you are willing NOT to know yourself, IN ORDER to be sick. 
This IS 
the offering which your god demands, because having made him 
out of YOUR insanity, he IS an insane idea. 
He has many forms, but 
though he may seem like many different things, he is but one idea;— 
the denial of God. 


T 9 K 4. 
Sickness and death entered the mind of God's Son against 
His Will. 
The "attack on God" made His Son think he was fatherless, 
and out of his T(416) - 243 - depression he made the god of depression. 

This was his alternative to joy, because he would not accept the fact 
that, although he was a creator, he had been created. 
Yet the Son IS 
helpless without the Father, Who alone IS his Help. 
407 We said be¬ 
fore that of yourselves you can do nothing, 408 but you are not OF 
yourselves. 
If you were, what you have made would be true, and 
you could never escape. 


T 9 K 5. 
It is BECAUSE you did not make yourselves, that you need 
be troubled by nothing. 
409 Your gods are nothing, because your Fa¬ 
ther did not create them. 
You cannot make creators who are unlike 
your Creator, any more than He could have created a Son who was 
unlike Him. 
If creation is sharing, it cannot create what is unlike it- 


407 Psalm 121:2 My help comes from the LORD, Who made heaven and earth. 


4114 John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do 
nothing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like 
manner.” 

John 5:30 “I can of Myself do nothing. 
As I hear, I judge; and My judgment is righteous, because I do 
not seek My own will but the will of the Father who sent Me.” 

409 John 14:1 “Let not your heart be troubled; you believe in God, believe also in Me.” 


1-368 


378 



Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


self. 
It can share only what it IS. 
Depression is isolation, and so it 
could not have BEEN created. 


T 9 K 6. 
Son of God, you have not sinned, but you have been much 
mistaken. 
But this can be corrected, and God will help you, knowing 
that you could not sin against Him. 
You denied Him BECAUSE you 
loved Him, knowing that if you RECOGNIZED your love for Him, 
you COULD not deny Him. 
Your denial therefore MEANS that you 
love Him, and THAT YOU KNOW HE LOVES YOU. 
Remember 
that what you deny you MUST have known. 
And if you can accept 
denial, YOU CAN ACCEPT ITS UNDOING. 


T 9 K 7. 
Your Father has not denied you. 
He does not retaliate, but He 
DOES call to you to return. 
When you think He has not answered 
your call, YOU HAVE NOT ANSWERED HIS. 
He calls to you from 
every part of the Sonship, because of His love for His Son. 
If you 
hear His message. 
He HAS answered you, and you will learn what 
you are of Him, if you hear aright. 
The love of God is in everything 
He created, for His Son is everywhere. 
Look with peace upon your 
brothers, and God will come rushing into your heart, in gratitude 
for your gift to Him. 


T 9 K 8. 
Do not look to the god of sickness for healing, but only to the 
God of love, for healing is the acknowledgment of Him. 
When you 
acknowledge Him, you will KNOW that He has never ceased to ac¬ 
knowledge you, and that in T(417) - 244 - His acknowledgment OF you 
lies your Being. 
You are not sick, and you cannot die. 
But you CAN 
confuse your self with things that do. 
Remember, though, that to do 
this IS blasphemy, for it means that you are looking without love on 
God and His Creation, from which He cannot be separated. 
Only 
the eternal can be loved, for love does not die. 
What is of God is His 
forever, and you ARE of God. 
Would He allow Himself to suffer? 
And would He offer His Son anything that is not acceptable to Him? 

T 9 K 9. 
If you will accept yourself as God created you, you will be 
incapable of suffering. 
But to do this, you must acknowledge Him as 
your Creator. 
This is not because you will be punished otherwise. 
It 
is merely because your acknowledgment of your Father IS the ac- 


379 


1-369 


Volume I Text 


knowledgment of yourself as you ARE. 
Your Father created you 
Wholly without sin, wholly without pain, and wholly without suf¬ 
fering of any kind. 
If you deny Him, you bring sin, pain, and suffer¬ 
ing into your OWN mind, because of the power He gave it. 
Your 
mind is capable of creating worlds, but it can also DENY what it 
creates, because it is free. 


T 9 K 10. 
You do not realize how much you have denied yourself, and 
how much God, in His love, would not have it so. 
Yet He would not 
interfere with you, because He would not know His Son if he were 
not free. 
To interfere with you would be to attack HIMSELF, and 
God is not insane. 
When you denied HIM, you WERE insane. 


Would you have Him SHARE your insanity? God will never cease 
to love His Son, and His Son will never cease to love Him. 
That was 
the condition of His Son's Creation, fixed forever in the Mind of 
God. 
To know that is sanity. 
To deny it is insanity. 
God gave HIM¬ 
SELF to you in your Creation, and His gifts ARE eternal. 
Would you 
deny yourself to Him? 

T 9 K ll. 
Out of your gifts to Him, the Kingdom will be restored to 
His Son. 
His Son removed himself from His gift by refusing to ac¬ 
cept what had been created FOR him, and what he himself had cre¬ 
ated in the name of His Father. 
Heaven waits for his return, for it 
was created as the dwelling place of God's Son. 
You are not at home 
anywhere else, or in any other condition. 
Do not deny yourself the 
joy which was created FOR you, for the misery you have made for 
yourselves. 
God has given you the means for undoing what you 
have made. 
Listen, and you WILL learn what you are. 
T(418) -245 

T 9 K12. 
If God knows His children as wholly sinless, it is blasphe¬ 
mous to perceive them as guilty. 
If God knows His children as 
wholly without pain, it is blasphemous to perceive suffering any¬ 
where. 
If God knows his children to be wholly joyous, it is blasphe¬ 
mous to feel depressed. 
All these illusions, and the many other 
forms which blasphemy may take, are REFUSALS TO ACCEPT 
CREATION AS IT IS. 
If God created His Son perfect, that is how 
you must learn to see him, to learn of his reality. 
And as part of the 


1-370 


380 


Chapter 9 - The Correction of Error 


Sonship, THAT IS HOW YOU MUST SEE YOURSELF TO LEARN 
YOURS. 


T 9 K13. 
Do not perceive ANYTHING God did not create, or you 
ARE denying Him. 
His is the ONLY Fatherhood, and it is yours 
only because HE has given it to you. 
Your gifts to YOURSELF are 
meaningless, but your gifts to YOUR creations are like His, because 
they are given in His Name. 
That is why your creations are as real as 
His. 
But the real Fatherhood must be acknowledged, if the real Son 
is to be known. 
You believe that the sick things which you have 
made are your real creations, because you believe that the sick im¬ 
ages you perceive are the Sons of God. 


T 9 K14. 
Only if you ACCEPT the Fatherhood of God will you have 
anything, because His Fatherhood GAVE you everything. 
That is 
why to deny Him IS to deny yourself. 
Arrogance is the denial of 
love, because love shares and arrogance withholds. 
As long as both 
appear to you to be desirable, the concept of choice, which is not of 
God, will remain with you. 
While this is not true in Eternity, it IS 
true in time, so that, while time lasts in YOUR minds, there WILL be 
choices. 
Time itself WAS your choice. 
If you would remember Eter¬ 
nity, you must learn to look on only the Eternal. 
If you allow your¬ 
selves to become preoccupied with the temporal, you are LIVING 
IN TIME. 
As always, your choice is determined by what you value. 

Time and Eternity cannot both be real, because they contradict each 
other. 
If you will accept only what is timeless as real, you will begin 
to understand Eternity, and make it yours.T(419) - 246 - 


381 


1-371 


Volume I Text 


Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 

T 10 A. 
Introduction (Notes 909 8:13) 

T 10 A l. 
Either God or the ego is insane. 
If you will examine the evi¬ 
dence ON BOTH SIDES fairly, you will realize that this MUST be 
true. 
Neither God nor the ego proposes a partial thought system. 

Each is internally consistent, but they are diametrically opposed in 
all respects, so that partial allegiance is impossible. 
But remember 
that their results are as different as their foundations, and their fun¬ 
damentally irreconcilable natures CANNOT be resolved by YOUR 
vacillations. 
Nothing alive is fatherless, for life is creation. 
Therefore, 
your decision is always an answer to the question, "Who is my fa¬ 
ther?" And you WILL be faithful to the father you choose. 


T to A 2. 
Yet what would you say to someone who REALLY believed 
this question involves conflict? If YOU made the ego, how can the 
ego have made YOU? The authority problem remains the ONLY 
source of perceived conflict, because the ego was MADE out of the 
wish of God's Son to father HIM. 
The ego, then, is nothing more 
than a delusional system in which YOU MADE YOUR OWN FA¬ 
THER. 
Make no mistake about this. 
It sounds insane when it is 
stated with perfect honesty, but the ego never looks upon what it 
does with perfect honesty. 
Yet that IS its insane premise, which is 
carefully hidden in the dark cornerstone of its thought system. 
And 
either the ego, which you made, IS your father, or its whole thought 
system will not stand. 


T 10 B. 
Projection versus Extension (Notes 911 8:15) 

T 10 B l. 
You have made by projection, but God has created by exten¬ 
sion. 
The cornerstone of God's creation is YOU, for HIS thought sys¬ 
tem is light. 
Remember the rays that are there unseen. 
The more you 
approach the center of HIS thought system, the clearer the light be¬ 
comes. 
The closer you come to the foundation of the ego's thought 
system, the darker and more obscure becomes the way. 
But even the 
little spark in your mind is enough to lighten it. 
Bring this light fear- 


1-372 


382 


Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


lessly with you, and hold it up to the foundation of the ego's 
thought system bravely. 
Be willing to judge it with perfect honesty. 

Open the dark stone of terror on which it rests, and bring it out into 
the light. 
There you will see that it rests on meaninglessness, and 
that everything of which you have been afraid was based on noth¬ 
ing. 
T(420) - 247 - 

T 10 B 2. 
My brother, you are part of God and part of me. 
When you 
have at last looked at the ego's foundation without shrinking, you 
will also have looked upon ours. 
I come to you from our Father, to 
offer you everything again. 
Do not refuse it to keep a dark corner¬ 
stone hidden, for ITS protection will not save you. 
I GIVE you the 
lamp, and I will go with you. 
You will not take this journey alone. 
I 
will lead you to your true Father, Who hath need of you, as I have. 

Will you not answer the call of love with joy? 

T 10 B 3. 
You HAVE learned your need of healing. 
Would you bring 
anything 410 ELSE to the Sonship, KNOWING your need of it for 
yourself? For in this lies the beginning of knowledge; the foundation 
on which God will help you build again the thought system which 
you share WITH Him. 
Not one stone you place upon it but will be 
blessed by Him. 
For you will be restoring the holy dwelling place of 
His Son, where He wills His Son to be, and where he IS. 
In whatever 
part of the mind of God's Son you restore this reality, you restore it 
to YOURSELF. 
For you dwell in the Mind of God WITH your 
brother, for God Himself did not will to be alone. 
T(42l) - 248 - 411 
T to B 4. 
To be alone is to be separated from Infinity, but how can this 
be, if Infinity has no end? No-one can BE beyond the limitless, be¬ 
cause what has NO limits, must be everywhere. 
There are no begin¬ 
nings and no endings in God, Whose Universe is Himself. 
412 Can 
you exclude yourself from the Universe, or from God, Who IS the 

410 Notes shows “aught” rather than “anything” 

411 August 8, 1966. 


4I " Hebrews 7:3 Without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days 
nor end of life, but made like the Son of God, remains a priest continually. 



383 


1-373 



Volume I Text 


Universe? I and my Father are one 413 with YOU, for you are part of 
us. 
Do you REALLY believe that part of God can be missing or lost 
to Him? 

T 10 B 5. 
If you were not part of God, His Will would not be unified. 


Is this conceivable? Can part of His Mind contain nothing? If your 
place in His Mind cannot be filled by anyone EXCEPT you, and 
your filling it WAS your creation, WITHOUT you, there would be 
an empty place in God's Mind. 
Extension cannot be blocked, and it 
has no voids. 
It continues forever, however much it is denied. 
Your 
DENIAL of its reality arrests it in time, but not in Eternity. 
That is 
why your creations have not ceased to be extended, and why so 
much is waiting for your return. 


T 10 B 6. 
Waiting is possible ONLY in time, but time has no meaning. 

You who made delay can leave time behind, simply by recognizing 
that neither beginnings nor endings were created by the Eternal, 
Who placed no limits on His creation nor upon those who create like 
Him. 
You do not know this, simply because you have tried to limit 
what HE created, and so you believe that ALL creation is limited. 

How, then, could you know YOUR creations, having DENIED Infin¬ 
ity? The laws of the universe do not permit contradiction. 
What 
holds for God holds for you. 
If you believe YOU are absent from 
God, you WILL believe He is absent from you. 


T 10 B 7. 
Infinity is meaningless WITHOUT you, and YOU are mean¬ 
ingless without God. 
There IS no end to God and His Son, for we 
ARE the universe. 
God is not incomplete, and He is not childless. 

Because He did not will to be alone. 
He created a Son like Himself. 

Do not deny Him His Son, for your unwillingness to accept His Fa¬ 
therhood has denied you yours. 
See His creations as HIS Son, for 
yours were created in honor of Him. 
T(422) - 249 - 

T 10 B 8. 
The universe of love does not stop because you do not see it, 
and your closed eyes have not lost the ability to see. 
Look upon the 


John 10:30 “I and My Father are one.” 

John 14:20 “At that day you will know that I am in My Father, and you in Me, and I in you.” 


1-374 


384 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


glory of His creation, and you will learn what God has kept for 
YOU. 
God has given you a place in His Mind which is yours for¬ 
ever. 
But you could keep it only by Giving it, as it was given to you. 

Could YOU be alone there, if it was given you because GOD did not 
will to be alone? God's Mind cannot be lessened. 
It can ONLY be 
increased, and EVERYTHING He creates has the function of creat¬ 
ing. 
414 LOVE DOES NOT LIMIT, and what it creates is not limited. 


T to B 9. 
To give without limit is God's Will for you, because only this 
can bring you the joy which is His, and which He wills to share with 
YOU. 
Your love is as boundless as His because it IS His. 
Could any 
part of Him be WITHOUT His Love, and could any part of His Love 
be contained? God is your heritage, because His one gift is Himself. 

How can you give except LIKE Him, if you would know His gift to 
YOU? Give, then, without limit and without end, to learn how much 
HE has given YOU. 
Your ability to ACCEPT Him depends on your 
willingness to give as He gives. 
Your fatherhood and your Father 
are One. 
T(423) -250 415 

T 10 B 10. 
God willed to create, and your will is His. 
It follows, then, 
that YOU will to create, since your will follows from His. 
And being 
the extension of His will, yours MUST be the same. 
Yet what you 
will, you do not know. 
This is not strange, when you realize that to 
deny IS to not know. 
God's Will was that you are His Son. 
By DE¬ 
NYING this, you denied your OWN will, and therefore DO NOT 
KNOW WHAT IT IS. 
The reason you must ask what God's Will is in 
everything, is merely because It IS yours. 
YOU do not know what it 
is, but the Holy Spirit REMEMBERS IT FOR YOU. 


T 10 B 11 . 
Ask him, therefore, what God's Will is for you, and He will 
tell you YOURS. 
It cannot be too often repeated that you do NOT 
KNOW it. 
Whenever what the Holy Spirit tells you appears to be 
coercive, it is ONLY because YOU DO NOT RECOGNIZE YOUR 
OWN WILL. 
The projection of the ego makes it appear as if God's 


414 This sentence is repeated in the manuscript. 


415 August 10, 1966. 



385 


1-375 



Volume I Text 


Will is OUTSIDE yourself, and therefore NOT YOURS. 
In THIS in¬ 
terpretation, it IS possible for God's Will and yours to conflict. 
God, 
then, may seem to demand of you what you do NOT want to give, 
and thus DEPRIVE you of what you want. 
Would God, Who wants 
ONLY your will, be capable of this? Your will is His Life, which He 
has GIVEN to you. 
Even in time you cannot live apart from Him, for 
sleep is not death. 
What He created can sleep, but it CANNOT die. 

Immortality is His Will for His Son, and His Son's will for HIM¬ 
SELF. 
Yet God's Son cannot will death for himself, because His Fa¬ 
ther is Life, and HIS SON IS LIKE HIM. 


T to B 12. 
Creation is your will because it is His. 
You cannot be happy 
unless you do what you will truly, and you CHANGE this, because 
it is immutable. 
But it is immutable by God's Will AND YOURS, for 
otherwise His Will would not have been extended. 
You are afraid to 
know God's Will, because you believe it is NOT yours. 
This belief is 
your whole sickness, and your whole fear. 
Every symptom of sick¬ 
ness and fear arises 416 here, because this is the belief that makes you 
want not to know. 
Believing this, you hide in T(424) -251 darkness, 
denying that the Light is in YOU. 


T 10 B 13. 
You are asked to trust the Holy Spirit only because He 
speaks for YOU. 
He is the Voice for God, but never forget that God 
did not will to be alone. 
He SHARES His Will with you; He does not 
thrust it UPON you. 
Always remember that what He gives He 
holds, so that nothing He gives CAN contradict Him. 
You who 
share His Life must share it to KNOW it, for sharing IS knowing. 

Blessed are 417 you who learn that to hear the Will of your Father, is 
to know your own. 
For it is YOUR will to be LIKE Him, Whose Will 
it is that it be so. 



416 The manuscript has “arise” here but both the Notes and the HLC have “arises” which is 
grammatically correct. 


417 This word pair “Blessed Are” occurs 8 times in the Ur Text volume and once in the Workbook and 
appears to be a literary parallel to the Biblical Beatitudes in Matthew 5:3-11. 



1-376 


386 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


T 10 B 14. 
God's Will is that His Son be One, and united with Him in 
His Oneness. 
That is why healing is the beginning of the recognition 
that YOUR WILL IS HIS. 
418 

T 10 C. 
The Willingness for Healing (Notes 927 8:31) 

T 10 C l. 
If sickness is separation, the will to heal and BE HEALED is 
the first step toward RECOGNIZING WHAT YOU TRULY WANT. 

Every ATTACK is a step AWAY from this, and every healing 
thought brings it closer. 
The Son of God HAS both Father and Son 
because he IS both Father and Son. 


T 10 C 2. 
To unite having and being is only to unite your will with 
His, for He wills you HIMSELF. 
And you will yourself to HIM, be¬ 
cause in your perfect understanding of Him, you KNOW there IS 
but One Will. 
But when you attack ANY part of God and His King¬ 
dom, your understanding is NOT perfect, and what YOU will is 
therefore lost to you. 


T 10 C 3. 
Healing thus becomes A LESSON IN UNDERSTANDING, 
and the more you practice it, the better teacher AND LEARNER you 
become. 
If you have DENIED truth, what better witnesses to its real¬ 
ity could you have, than those who have been healed BY it? But be 
sure to count yourself among them, for in your willingness to JOIN 
them is YOUR healing accomplished. 


T 10 C 4. 
Every miracle which you accomplish speaks to you of the 
Fatherhood of God. 
Every healing thought which you ACCEPT, ei¬ 
ther FROM your brother or in your OWN mind, teaches you that 
you are God's Son. 
But in every hurtful thought you hold, wherever 
you perceive it, lies the denial of God's Fatherhood and your Son- 
ship. 
And denial IS as total as love. 
You cannot deny PART of your¬ 
self, simply because the remainder will seem to be unintegrated, and 
therefore without meaning. 
And being without meaning TO YOU, 
you will not understand it. 
T(425) -252 To deny meaning MUST be to 
fail to understand. 



418 251 [split paragraph] 


387 


1-377 



Volume I Text 


T 10 C 5. 
You can only heal yourself, for only God's Son NEEDS heal¬ 
ing. 
He needs it because he does not understand himself, and there¬ 
fore knows not what he does. 
419 Having forgotten his will, he does 
not know what he WANTS. 
Healing is a sign that HE WANTS TO 
MAKE WHOLE. 
And this willingness opens his OWN ears to the 
Voice of the Holy Spirit, Whose message IS wholeness. 
He will en¬ 
able you to go far beyond the healing YOU would undertake, for 
beside your small willingness to make whole He will lay His Own 
COMPLETE Will and make YOURS whole. 
What can the Son of 
God NOT accomplish with the Fatherhood of God in him?T(426) -253 

T 10 C 6. 
And yet the invitation must come from you, for you have 
surely learned that whom you invite as your guest WILL abide with 
you. 
420 The Holy Spirit cannot speak to an unwelcoming host, BE¬ 
CAUSE HE WILL NOT BE HEARD. 
The Eternal Guest remains, but 
His Voice grows faint in alien company. 
He needs your protection, 
but only because your care is a sign that you WANT Him. 
Think like 
Him ever so slightly, and the little spark becomes a blazing light 
that fills your mind so that He becomes your only Guest. 


T 10 C 7. 
Whenever you ask the ego to enter, you lessen His welcome. 

HE will remain, but YOU have allied yourself AGAINST Him. 

Whatever journey you choose to take. 
He will go with you, waiting. 

You can safely trust His patience, for He CANNOT leave a part of 
God. 
But you will far more than patience. 
You will never rest until 
you know your function AND FULFILL IT, for only in this can your 
will and your Father's be wholly joined. 
To HAVE Him is to be 
LIKE Him, and He has GIVEN Himself to you. 


T 10 C 8. 
You who have God MUST be as God, for HIS function be¬ 
came YOURS with His gift. 
Invite this knowledge back into your 
minds, and let nothing that will obscure it enter. 
The Guest whom 
God sent you will teach you how to do this, if you but recognize the 


419 Luke 23:34 Then Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.” And they 
divided His garments and cast lots. 


420 John 14:16 “And I will pray the Father, and He will give you another Helper, that He may abide 
with you forever.” 


1-378 


388 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


little spark, and are WILLING TO LET IT GROW. 
YOUR willing¬ 
ness need not be perfect, because His IS. 
If you will merely offer 
Him a little place. 
He will lighten it so much, that you will gladly 
extend it. 
And by THIS extending, you will begin to remember 
Creation. 


T to c 9. 
Would you be hostage to the ego or host to God? You will 
accept only whom YOU invite. 
You are free to determine who shall 
be your guest, and how long he shall remain with you. 
But this is 
not REAL freedom, for it depends on how you see it. 
For the Holy 
Spirit is THERE, although He cannot help you without your invita¬ 
tion, and the ego is nothing, whether you invite it in or not. 
Real 
freedom depends on welcoming REALITY, and of your guests only 
He IS real. 
Know, then. 
Who abides with you, merely by recogniz¬ 
ing WHAT IS ALREADY THERE, and do not be satisfied with 

imaginary comforters, for the Comforter 421 of God is in you. 
T(427) - 
254 - 

T 10 D. 
From Darkness to Light (Notes 936 8:39) 

T 10 D 1. 
When you are weary, remember you have hurt yourself. 

Your Comforter will rest 422 you, but YOU cannot. 
YOU DO NOT 
KNOW HOW, for if you did, you could never have grown weary. 

Unless you have hurt yourselves, you could never suffer in ANY 
way, for that is not God's Will for His Son. 
Pain is not of Him, for 
He knows no attack, and His peace surrounds you silently. 
God is 
very quiet, for there is no conflict in Him. 
Conflict is the root of all 
evil, 423 for being blind, it does not see whom it attacks. 
But it AL¬ 
WAYS attacks the Son of God, and the Son of God is YOU. 


T 10 D 2. 
God's Son is indeed in need of comfort, for he knows not 
what he does, 424 believing his will is not his own. 
The Kingdom is 


1 see previous note 

422 Matthew 11:28-29 “Come to Me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. 

Take My yoke upon you and learn from Me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest 
for your souls.” 

42 1 Timothy 6:10 For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil, for which some have strayed 
from the faith in their greediness, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. 


424 Luke 23:34 Then Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.” And they 
divided His garments and cast lots. 



389 


1-379 



Volume I Text 


his, and yet he wanders homelessly. 
At home in God he is lonely, 
and amid all his brothers he is friendless. 
Would God let this be real, 
if He did not will to be alone Himself? And if your will is His, it 
CANNOT be true of you, BECAUSE it is not true of Him. 
Oh my 
children, if you knew what God wills for you, your joy would be 
complete! 425 And what He wills HAS happened, for it was ALWAYS 
true. 


T 10 D 3. 
When the light comes, and you have said, "God's Will is 
mine," you will see such beauty that you will KNOW it is not of 
you. 
Out of your joy, you will create beauty in His Name, for YOUR 
joy could no more be contained than His. 
The bleak little world will 
vanish into nothingness, and your heart will be so filled with joy 
that it will leap into Heaven and into the presence of God. 
I cannot 
tell you what this will be like, for your hearts are not ready. 
But I 
CAN tell you, and remind you often, that what God wills for Him¬ 
self He wills for YOU, and what He wills for you IS yours. 


T 10 D 4. 
The way is not hard, but it IS very different. 
Yours is the 
way of pain, of which God knows nothing. 
THAT way is hard in¬ 
deed, and very lonely. 
Fear and grief are your guests, and they go 
with you, and abide with you on the way. 
But the dark journey is 
not the way of God's Son. 
Walk in light, and do not see the dark 
companions, for they are not fit companions for the Son of God, 
who was created OF Light and IN Light. 
T(428) -255 The Great Light 
ALWAYS surrounds you, and shines out FROM you. 
How can you 
see the dark companions in a Light such as this? If you see THEM, it 
is only because you are denying the Light. 
But DENY THEM IN¬ 
STEAD, for the Light is here, and the way is clear. 


T 10 D 5. 
God hides nothing from His Son, even though he would 
hide himself. 
Yet the Son of God cannot hide his glory, for God wills 
him to be glorious, and GAVE him the Light that shines in him. 
You 


425 John 15:11 ‘‘These things I have spoken to you, that My joy may remain in you, and that your joy 
may be complete.” 

John 16:24 “Until now you have asked nothing in My name. 
Ask, and you will receive, that your joy 
may be full.” 


1-380 


390 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


will never lose your way, for God leads you. 
When you wander, you 
but undertake a journey which is not real. 
The dark companions, the 
dark way, are all illusions. 
Turn toward the Light, for the little spark 
in you is part of a Light so great that it can sweep you out of all 
darkness forever. 
For your Father IS your Creator, and you ARE like 
Flim. 
The Children of Light 426 cannot abide in darkness, for darkness 
is NOT in them. 


T to D 6. 
Do not be deceived by the dark comforters, and never let 
them enter the mind of God's Son, for they have no place in Elis 
temple. 
427 When you are tempted to deny Flim, remember that there 
ARE no other Gods that you CAN place before Flim, and accept Flis 
Will for you in peace. 
For you CANNOT accept it otherwise. 
Only 
God's Comforter CAN comfort you. 
In the quiet of Flis temple. 
Fie 
waits to give you the peace that is yours. 
GIVE Flis peace that you 
may enter the temple, and find it waiting for you. 
But be holy in the 
Presence of God, or you will not know that you are there. 
For what 
is unlike God cannot enter Fhs Mind, because it was not in Flis 
Thought, and therefore does not belong to Flim. 
And YOUR minds 
must be as pure as Flis, if you would know what belongs to YOU. 


T 10 D 7. 
Guard carefully Flis temple, for Fie Flimself dwells there, 
and abides in peace. 
You cannot enter God's Presence with the dark 
companions beside you, but you also cannot enter alone. 
All your 
brothers must enter WITH you, for until you have accepted them, 
YOU cannot enter. 
For you cannot understand Wholeness unless 
YOU are whole, and no part of the Son can be excluded, if he would 
know the wholeness of his Father. 
T(429) -256 

T 10 D 8. 
In your mind you can ACCEPT the whole Sonship, and bless 
it with the light your Father gave it. 
Then you will be worthy to 
dwell in the temple WITF1 Flim, because it is YOUR will not to be 


426 Luke 16:8 So the master commended the unjust steward because he had dealt shrewdly. 
For the sons 
of this world are more shrewd in their generation than the sons of light. 


1 Thessalonians 5:5 You are all sons of light and sons of the day. 
We are not of the night nor of 
darkness. 


427 1 Corinthians 3:16 Do you not know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God 
dwells in you? 


391 


1-381 



Volume I Text 


alone. 
God blessed His Son forever. 
If you will bless him in TIME, 
you will BE in eternity. 
Time cannot separate you from God, if you 
use it on BEHALF of the eternal. 
T(430) - 257 - 

T 10 E. 
The Inheritance of God's Son (Notes 946 8:50) 

T to E 1. 
Never forget that the Sonship is your salvation, for the Son- 
ship is your Soul. 
As God's Creation it is yours, and belonging to 
you, it is His. 
Your Soul does not need salvation, but your mind 
needs to learn what salvation IS. 
You are not saved FROM anything, 
but you ARE saved FOR glory. 
Glory is your inheritance, given your 
Soul by its Creator, that you might EXTEND it. 
But if you hate part 
of your own Soul, ALL your understanding is lost, because you are 
looking on what God creates AS YOURSELF without love. 
And 
since what He created IS part of Him, you are denying Him His 
place in His own altar. 


T 10 E 2. 
Could you try to make God homeless, and know YOU are at 
home? Can the Son deny the Father, WITHOUT believing that the 
Father has denied HIM? God's laws hold ONLY for your protection, 
and they never hold in vain. 
What you experience, when you deny 
your father, is still for your protection, for the power of your will 
cannot be lessened without the intervention of God AGAINST it, 
and any limitation on YOUR power is NOT the Will of God. 
There¬ 
fore, look ONLY to the power that God gave you to save you, re¬ 
membering that it is yours BECAUSE it is His, and join with your 
brothers in His peace. 


T 10 E 3. 
The peace of YOUR Soul lies in its limitlessness. 
Limit the 
peace you share, and your own Soul MUST be unknown to you. 

Every altar to God is part of your Soul, because the Light He created 
is One with Him. 
Would you cut a brother off from the Light that is 
yours? You could not do so, if you realized that YOU CAN ONLY 
DARKEN YOUR OWN MIND. 
As you bring HIM back, so will 
YOUR mind return. 
That is the law of God, for the protection of the 
wholeness of His Son. 



1-382 


392 


Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


T 10 E 4. 
ONLY YOU CAN DEPRIVE YOURSELF OF ANYTHING. 

Do not oppose this realization, for it is truly the beginning of the 
dawn of light. 
Remember also that the denial of this simple fact 
takes many forms, and these you must learn to recognize, and op¬ 
pose steadfastly and WITHOUT EXCEPTION. 
This is a crucial step 
in the re-awakening. 
The beginning phases of this reversal are often 
quite painful, for as blame is withdrawn from without, there is a 
strong tendency to harbor it within. 


T 10 E 5. 
It is difficult, at first, to realize that this is EXACTLY T(431) - 
258 the same thing, for there IS no distinction between within and 
without. 
If your brothers are part of YOU, and you blame THEM for 
your deprivation, you ARE blaming yourself. 
And you cannot 
blame yourself WITHOUT blaming them. 


T 10 E 6. 
That is why blame must be UNDONE, NOT re-allocated. 

Lay it to yourself, and you cannot KNOW yourself, for ONLY THE 
EGO BLAMES AT ALL. 
Self-blame is therefore ego identification, 
and as strong an ego defense as blaming others. 
YOU CANNOT 
ENTER GOD's PRESENCE IF YOU ATTACK HIS SON. 
When His 
Son lifts his voice in praise of his Creator, he WILL hear the Voice of 
his Father. 
But the Creator cannot be praised WITHOUT His Son, 
for their glory is shared, and they are glorified together. 
Christ is at 
God's altar, waiting to welcome His Son. 
But come wholly without 
condemnation, for otherwise you will believe that the door is 
barred, and you cannot enter. 


T 10 E 7. 
The door is NOT barred, and it is impossible for you to be 
unable to enter the place where God would have you be. 
But love 
yourself with the love of Christ, for so does your Father love you. 
428 
You CAN refuse to enter, but you CANNOT bar the door which 
Christ holds open. 
Come unto me who hold it open FOR you, for 
while I live, it cannot be shut, and I live forever. 
429 God is my Life 


428 John 13:34 “A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another; as I have loved you, 
that you also love one another.” 

429 Matthew 11:28 “Come to Me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. 
“ 


393 


1-383 




Volume I Text 


and YOURS, and NOTHING is denied by God to His Son. 
At God's 
altar, Christ waits for the restoration of Himself in YOU. 


T to E 8. 
God knows His Son as wholly blameless as Himself, and He 
is approached through the appreciation of His Son. 
Christ waits for 
your acceptance of Him as YOURSELF, and His Wholeness as 
YOURS. 
For Christ is the Son of God, who lives in his Creator, and 
shines with His glory. 
Christ is the extension of the love and the 
loveliness of God, as perfect as his Creator, and at peace with Him. 

Blessed is the Son of God, whose radiance is of His Father, and 
whose glory T(432) -259 He wills to share as His Father shares it with 
Him. 
430 

T 10 E 9. 
There is no condemnation in the Son, for there is no con¬ 
demnation in the Father. 
Sharing the perfect Love of the Father, the 
Son must share what belongs to Him, for otherwise He will not 
know the Father or the Son. 
Peace be unto you 431 who rest in God, 
and in whom the whole Sonship rests. 
T(433) - 260 - 432 

T 10 F. 
The "Dynamics" of the Ego (Notes 952 8:56) 

T 10 F l. 
No-one can escape from illusions unless he looks at them, for 
not looking is the way they are PROTECTED. 
There is no need to 
shrink from illusions, for they cannot be dangerous. 
We are ready to 
look more closely at the ego's thought system, because together we 
have the lamp that will dispel it, and since you realize you do not 
WANT it, you MUST be ready. 
Let us be very calm in doing this, for 
we are merely looking honestly for truth. 
The "dynamics" of the ego 
will be our lesson for a while, for we must look first at this to look 
beyond it, since you HAVE made it real. 
We will UNDO this error 
quietly together, and then look beyond it to truth. 



430 Psalm 118:26 Blessed is he who comes in the name of the LORD! We have blessed you from the 
house of the LORD. 


Then the multitudes who went before and those who followed cried out, saying: 

Hosanna to the Son of David! 

Matthew 21:9 Blessed is He who comes in the name of the LORD! 

Hosanna in the highest! 

431 John 20:21 So Jesus said to them again, “Peace to you! As the Father has sent Me, I also send you.” 

432 August 24, 1966 


1-384 


394 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


T 10 F 2. 
What is healing, but the removal of all that STANDS IN THE 
WAY of knowledge? And how else can one dispel illusions EXCEPT 
by looking at them directly, WITHOUT protecting them? Be not 
afraid, therefore, for what you will be looking at IS the source of 
fear, but you have learned surely by now, that FEAR IS NOT REAL. 

We have accepted the fact already that its EFFECTS can be dis¬ 
pelled, merely by denying THEIR reality. 
The next step is obviously 
to recognize that WHAT HAS NO EFFECTS DOES NOT EXIST. 


T 10 F 3. 
Laws do not operate in a vacuum, and what leads to nothing 
HAS NOT HAPPENED. 
If reality is recognized BY ITS EXTEN¬ 
SION, what extends to nothing CANNOT be real. 
Do not be afraid, 
then, to look upon fear, for it cannot BE seen. 
Clarity undoes confu¬ 
sion by definition, and to look upon darkness through light MUST 
dispel it. 
Let us begin this lesson in "ego dynamics", by understand¬ 
ing that the term itself does not mean anything. 
In fact, it contains 
exactly the contradiction in terms that MAKES it meaningless. 
"Dy¬ 
namics" implies the power to DO something, and the whole separa¬ 
tion fallacy lies in the belief that the ego HAS the power to do ANY¬ 
THING. 


T 10 F 4. 
The ego is fearful BECAUSE you believe this. 
But the truth is 
very simple; ALL POWER IS OF GOD. 
What is NOT of Him has no 
power to do ANYTHING. 
When we look at the ego, then, we are 
NOT considering dynamics, but delusions. 
We can surely regard a 
delusional system without fear, T(434) - 261 - for it cannot have any 
effects if its source is not true. 
Fear becomes more obviously inap¬ 
propriate if one recognizes the ego's GOAL, which is so clearly 
senseless that any effort exerted on its behalf is NECESSARILY ex¬ 
pended on nothing. 


T 10 F 5. 
The ego's goal is quite explicitly EGO AUTONOMY. 
From 
the beginning, then, its PURPOSE is to be separate, sufficient unto 
itself, and independent of any power EXCEPT ITS OWN. 
This is 
WHY it is the symbol of separation. 
Every idea has a purpose, and 
its purpose is always the natural extension of what it IS. 
Everything 
that stems from the ego is the natural outcome of its central belief. 



395 


1-385 


Volume I Text 


and the way to undo its RESULTS, is merely to recognize that their 
SOURCE is NOT natural, being out of accord with your TRUE na¬ 
ture. 


T 10 F 6. 
We once said that to will contrary to God is wishful think¬ 
ing, and not real willing. 
His Will is One, because the extension of 
His Will CANNOT be unlike ITSELF. 
The real conflict you experi¬ 
ence, then, is between the ego's idle wishes and the Will of God, 
WHICH YOU SHARE. 
Can this BE a real conflict? Yours is the in¬ 
dependence of Creation, NOT of autonomy. 
Your whole creative 
function lies in your complete dependence on God, Whose function 
He shares WITH you. 
By HIS willingness to share it. 
He becomes as 
dependent on you, as you are on HIM . 
Do not ascribe the ego's ar¬ 
rogance to Him, Who wills NOT to be independent of YOU. 
He has 
included YOU in HIS Autonomy. 
Can YOU believe that autonomy 
is meaningful APART from Him? 

T 10 F 7. 
The belief in EGO autonomy is costing you the knowledge of 
your dependence on God, IN WHICH YOUR FREEDOM LIES. 
The 
ego sees ALL dependency as threatening, and has twisted even your 
longing for God into a means of establishing ITSELF. 
But do not be 
deceived by ITS interpretation of your conflict. 
The ego ALWAYS 
attacks on behalf of separation. 
Believing it HAS the power to do 
this, it does nothing else, because its goal of autonomy T(435) -262 IS 
nothing else. 
The ego is totally confused about reality, BUT IT DOES 
NOT LOSE SIGHT OF ITS GOAL. 
It is much more vigilant than 
YOU are, BECAUSE it is perfectly certain of its purpose. 
YOU are 
confused, because you do NOT know YOURS. 


T 10 F 8. 
What you must learn to recognize is that the LAST thing the 
ego wishes you to realize, is THAT YOU ARE AFRAID OF IT. 
For if 
the ego gives rise to fear, it is DIMINISHING your independence, 
and WEAKENING your power. 
Yet its one claim to your allegiance 
is that it can GIVE power to you. 
Without THIS belief, you would 
not listen to it at all. 
How, then, can its existence continue, if you re¬ 
alize that by accepting it, you ARE belittling yourself, and DEPRIV¬ 
ING yourself of power? 


1-386 


396 




Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


T 10 F 9. 
The ego can and does allow you to regard yourself as super¬ 
cilious, unbelieving, "light hearted -," distant, emotionally shallow, 
callous, uninvolved, and even desperate, BUT NOT REALLY 
AFRAID. 
MINIMIZING fear, but NOT its undoing, is the ego's con¬ 
stant effort, and is indeed the skill at which it is VERY ingenious. 

How can it preach separation WITHOUT upholding it through fear, 
and would you listen to it, if you recognized this IS what it is doing? 

T 10 F10. 
YOUR recognition that whatever seems to separate you 
from God is ONLY fear, regardless of the form it takes, and quite 
apart from HOW THE EGO WANTS TO YOU TO EXPERIENCE IT, 
is therefore the basic ego threat. 
Its dream of autonomy is shaken to 
its foundation by this awareness. 
For though you may countenance 
a false idea of independence, you will NOT accept the cost of fear, IF 
YOU RECOGNIZE IT. 
Yet this IS the cost, and the ego CANNOT 
minimize it. 
For if you overlook love, you are overlooking YOUR¬ 
SELF, and you MUST fear UNreality BECAUSE YOU HAVE DE¬ 
NIED YOURSELF. 
T(436) 263 By believing that you have successfully 
attacked truth, YOU ARE BELIEVING THAT ATTACK HAS 
POWER. 
Very simply, then, YOU HAVE BECOME AFRAID OF 
YOURSELF. 
And no one wills to learn what he believes would DE¬ 
STROY him. 


T 10 F 11. 
If the ego's goal of autonomy COULD be accomplished 
GOD's purpose could be DEFEATED, and this IS impossible. 
Only 
by learning what fear IS, can you finally learn to distinguish the 
possible from the impossible, and the false from the true. 
According 
to the ego's teaching, ITS goal CAN be accomplished, and GOD's 
Purpose can NOT. 
According to the Holy Spirit's teaching, ONLY 
God's Purpose IS accomplishment, and it is ALREADY accom¬ 
plished. 


T 10 F12. 
God is as dependent on you as you are on Him, because 
HIS autonomy ENCOMPASSES yours, and is therefore incomplete 
WITHOUT it. 
You can only ESTABLISH your autonomy by identi¬ 
fying WITH Him, and FULFILLING YOUR FUNCTION AS IT EX¬ 
ISTS IN TRUTH. 
The ego believes that to accomplish ITS goal IS 


397 


1-387 


Volume I Text 


happiness. 
But it is given YOU to know that GOD's function IS 
yours, and happiness CANNOT be found apart from your joint will. 

Recognize only that the ego's goal, which you have pursued quite 
diligently, has merely brought you FEAR, and it becomes difficult to 
maintain that FEAR is happiness. 


T to F13. 
UPHELD by fear, this IS what the ego would have you be¬ 
lieve. 
Yet God's Son is not insane, and CANNOT believe it. 
Let him 
but RECOGNIZE it, and he will NOT accept it. 
For only the insane 
would choose fear IN PLACE of love, and only the insane could be¬ 
lieve that love can be gained by ATTACK. 
But the sane KNOW that 
only attack COULD produce fear, from which the love of God 
COMPLETELY protects them. 
T(437) - 264 - 

T 10 F14. 
The ego analyzes; the Holy Spirit ACCEPTS. 
The apprecia¬ 
tion of wholeness comes ONLY through acceptance, for to analyze 
MEANS to separate out. 
The attempt to understand totality by 
BREAKING IT UP is clearly the characteristically contradictory ap¬ 
proach of the ego to everything. 
Never forget that the ego believes 
that power, understanding AND TRUTH lie in separation. 
And to 
ESTABLISH this belief it MUST attack. 
Unaware that the belief can¬ 
not BE established, and obsessed with the conviction that separation 
IS salvation, the ego attacks everything it perceives, by breaking it 
up into small and disconnected parts, without meaningful relation¬ 
ships, and thus without meaning. 
The ego will ALWAYS substitute 
chaos for meaning, for if separation is salvation, harmony is threat. 


T 10 F15. 
The ego's interpretations of the laws of perception are, and 
would HAVE to be, the exact opposite of the Holy Spirit's. 
The ego 
FOCUSES ON ERROR, and OVERLOOKS TRUTH. 
It makes real 
every mistake it perceives, and with characteristically circular rea¬ 
soning, concludes that, BECAUSE of the mistake, consistent truth 
must be meaningless. 
The next step, then, is obvious. 
If consistent 
truth is meaningless, INCONSISTENCY must be true if truth has 
meaning. 
Holding error clearly in mind, and protecting what it has 
made real, the ego proceeds to the next step in its thought system; 
that error is real, and TRUTH IS ERROR. 



1-388 


398 


Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


T 10 F16. 
The ego makes no attempt to UNDERSTAND this, and it is 
clearly not understandable. 
But the ego does make EVERY attempt 
to DEMONSTRATE it, and THIS it does constantly. 
Analyzing to 
ATTACK meaning, the ego DOES succeed in overlooking it, and is 
left with a series of fragmented perceptions IN WHICH IT UNIFIES 
ON BEHALF OF ITSELF. 
This, then, becomes the universe it per¬ 
ceives and it is this universe which, in turn, becomes its demonstra¬ 
tion of its own reality. 
T(438) -265 

T 10 F17. 
Do not underestimate the appeal of the ego's demonstra¬ 
tions to those who would listen. 
Selective perception chooses its 
witnesses carefully, and its witnesses ARE consistent. 
The case for 
insanity IS strong to the insane. 
For reasoning ends at its beginning, 
and no thought system transcends its source. 
Yet reasoning without 
meaning CANNOT demonstrate anything, and those who are con¬ 
vinced by it, MUST be deluded. 
Can the ego teach truly, when it 
overlooks truth? Can it perceive what it has DENIED? Its witnesses 
DO attest to its DENIAL, but hardly to WHAT it has denied. 
The 
ego looks straight at the Father and does not see Him, for it has de¬ 
nied His Son. 


T 10 F18. 
Would YOU remember the Father? Accept His Son and you 
WILL remember Him. 
Nothing can demonstrate that His Son is un¬ 
worthy, for nothing can prove that a lie is true. 
What you see of His 
Son through the eyes of the ego is a demonstration that His Son 
does not exist, yet where the Son is, the Father MUST be. 
Accept 
what God does NOT deny, and HE will demonstrate its truth. 
The 
witnesses for God stand in His Light and behold what HE created. 

Their silence is the sign that they have beheld God's Son, and in the 
Presence of Christ, THEY need demonstrate nothing, for Christ 
speaks to them of Himself and of His Father. 
They are silent because 
Christ speaks to them, and it is His words that THEY speak. 


T 10 F19. 
Every brother you meet becomes a witness for Christ or for 
the ego, depending on what you perceive in him. 
Everyone con¬ 
vinces you of WHAT YOU WANT TO PERCEIVE, and of the reality 
of the Kingdom you have chosen for your vigilance. 
Everything you 


399 


1-389 


Volume I Text 


perceive is a witness to the thought-system YOU WANT TO BE 
TRUE. 
Every brother has the power to release you, IF YOU WILL 
TO BE FREE. 
You cannot accept false witness 433 of him, unless you 
have evoked false witnesses AGAINST him. 
If HE speaks not of 
Christ to YOU, YOU spoke not of Christ to him. 
You hear but your 

own voice, and if Christ speaks through you, YOU will hear Him. 

T(439) -266 

T 10 G. 
Experience and Perception (Notes 975 8:79) 

T to G1. 
It is impossible not to believe what you see, but it is equally 
impossible to see what you do NOT believe. 
Perceptions are built up 
on the basis of experience, and experience leads to beliefs. 
It is not 
until BELIEFS are fixed that perceptions stabilize. 
In effect, then, 
what you believe you DO see. 
That is what I meant when I said, 
"Blessed are ye who have not seen and still believe/' 434 for those 
who believe in the resurrection WILL see it. 
The resurrection is the 
complete triumph of Christ over the ego, not by attack, but by tran¬ 
scendence. 
For Christ DOES rise above the ego and all its works, 
and ascends to the Father and HIS Kingdom. 
435 

T 10 G 2. 
Would you join in the resurrection or the crucifixion? Would 
you condemn your brothers or free them? Would you transcend 
YOUR prison and ascend to the Father? For these questions are all 
the same, and are answered together. 
There has been much confu¬ 
sion about what perception means, because the same word is used 
both for awareness and for the INTERPRETATION of awareness. 

Yet you cannot BE aware without interpretation, and what you per¬ 
ceive IS your interpretation. 
This course is perfectly clear. 
You do 
not see it clearly because you are interpreting AGAINST it, and 
therefore do not BELIEVE it. 
And if belief determines perception. 



433 Exodus 20:16 You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor. 


434 John 20:29 Jesus said to him, "Thomas, because you have seen Me, you have believed. 
Blessed are 
those who have not seen and yet have believed.” 

435 John 20:17 Jesus said to her, “Do not cling to Me, for I have not yet ascended to My Father; but go 
to My brethren and say to them, I am ascending to My Father and your Father, and to My God and your 
God.” 


1-390 


400 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


you do NOT perceive what it means and therefore do not ACCEPT 
it. 


T to G 3. 
Yet different experiences lead to different beliefs, and with 
them different perceptions. 
For perceptions are learned WITH be¬ 
liefs, and experience teaches. 
436 1 am leading you to a new kind of 
experience which you will become less and less willing to deny. 

Learning of Christ is easy, for to perceive with Him involves no 
strain at all. 
HIS perceptions are your NATURAL awareness, and it 
is only distortions which YOU introduce that tire you. 
Let the Christ 
in you interpret FOR you, and do not try to limit what you see by 
narrow little beliefs which are unworthy of God's Son. 
For until 
Christ comes into His Own, the Son of God WILL see himself as fa¬ 
therless. 
T(440) -267 

T 10 G 4.1 am YOUR resurrection and YOUR life. 
437 You live in me 
because you live in God. 
And everyone lives in YOU, as YOU live in 
everyone. 
Can you, then, perceive unworthiness in a brother and 
NOT perceive it in yourself? And can you perceive it in yourself and 
NOT perceive it in God? Believe in the resurrection because it has 
BEEN accomplished, and it has been accomplished IN YOU. 
This is 
as true now as it will ever be, for the resurrection is the Will of God, 
Which knows no time and no exceptions. 
But make no exceptions 
yourself, or you will not perceive what has been accomplished FOR 
you. 
For we ascend unto the Father together, as it was in the begin¬ 
ning, is now, and ever shall be, 438 for such is the nature of God's Son 
as His Father created him. 
T(44l) -268 439 


436 The Notes reads: “Yet different experiences lead to different beliefs, and with them different percep- 
tions. 
For perceptions are learned beliefs, and experience does teach.” FIP Second Edition also restores 
this line to the original reading. 


437 John 11:25 Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. 
He who believes in Me, though he 
may die, he shall live.” 

438 Hebrews 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever. 


The wording here is reminiscent of the Gloria Patri or Minor Doxology commonly used in Christian 
liturgy: “Glory be to the Father, and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost/Spirit. 
As it was in the beginning, 
is now, and ever shall be, world without end. 
Amen.” The Greek original is of great antiquity, possibly 
the first century. 


439 31 August, 1966 


401 


1-391 



Volume I Text 


T 10 G 5. 
Do not underestimate the power of the devotion of God's 
Son, nor the power of the god he worships over him. 
For he places 
HIMSELF at the altar of his god, whether it be the god he made or 
the God Who created him. 
That is why his slavery is as complete as 
his freedom, for he will obey ONLY the god he accepts. 
The god of 
the crucifixion demands that he crucify, and his worshippers obey. 


In his name they crucify THEMSELVES, believing that the power of 
the Son of God is born of sacrifice and pain. 
The God of the resurrec¬ 
tion demands nothing, for He does not will to TAKE AWAY. 
He 
does not require obedience, for obedience implies submission. 
He 
would only have you learn your OWN will and follow it, not in the 
spirit of sacrifice and submission, but in the gladness of freedom. 


T to G 6. 
Resurrection must compel your allegiance gladly because it 
is the symbol of joy. 
Its whole compelling power lies in the fact that 
it represents what YOU want to be. 
The freedom to leave behind 
everything that hurts you and humbles you and frightens you can¬ 
not be thrust upon you, but it CAN be offered you through the grace 
of God. 
And you can ACCEPT it by His grace, for God IS gracious to 
His Son, accepting him without question as His Own. 
Who, then, is 
YOUR own? The Father has given you all that is His, and He Him¬ 
self is yours WITH them. 
440 Guard them in their resurrection, for 
otherwise you will not awake in God, safely surrounded by what is 
yours forever. 


T 10 G 7. 
You will not find peace until you have removed the nails 
from the hands of God's Son and taken the last thorn from his fore¬ 
head. 
441 The Love of God surrounds His Son whom the god of the 
crucifixion condemns. 
Teach not that I died in vain. 
Teach rather 
THAT I DID NOT DIE by demonstrating that I LIVE IN YOU. 
For 
the UNDOING of the crucifixion of God's Son is the work of the re¬ 
demption, in which everyone has a part of equal value. 
God does 

440 Luke 15:31 And he said to him, “Son, you are always with me, and all that I have is yours.” 

441 Matthew 27:29 When they had twisted a crown of thorns, they put it on His head, and a reed in His 
right hand. 
And they bowed the knee before Him and mocked Him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” 
John 19:5 So Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. 
Pilate said to them, 
“Look! Here is the man!” 


1-392 


402 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


not judge His blameless Son. 
T(442) -269 Having given HIMSELF to 
him, how could it be otherwise? 

T to G 8. 
You have nailed YOURSELF to a cross and placed a crown 
of thorns upon your own head. 
442 Yet you CANNOT crucify God's 
Son, for the Will of God cannot die. 
His Son HAS BEEN redeemed 
from his own crucifixion, and you cannot assign to death whom 
God has given eternal life. 
The dream of crucifixion still lies heavy 
on your eyes, but what you see in dreams is not reality. 
While you 
perceive the Son of God as crucified you are asleep. 
And as long as 
you believe that YOU can crucify him you are only having night¬ 
mares. 
You who are beginning to wake are still aware of dreams 
and have not yet forgotten them. 


T 10 G 9. 
Forgetting of dreams and the awareness of Christ comes 
with the awakening of others to SHARE your redemption. 
You will 
awaken to your own call, for the Call to awake is WITHIN you. 
If I 
live in you, you ARE awake. 
But YOU must see the works I do 
through you, or you will not perceive that I have done them unto 
YOU. 
Do not set limits on what you believe I can do THROUGH 
YOU, or you will not accept what I can do FOR you. 
For it is done 
ALREADY, and unless you give ALL that you have received, you 
will not know that your Redeemer liveth 443 and that YOU have 
awakened WITH Him. 
Redemption is recognized ONLY by sharing 
it. 


T 10 G10. 
God's Son IS saved. 
Bring only THIS awareness to the Son- 
ship, and you will have a part in the redemption as valuable as 
mine. 
For your part must be LIKE mine if you learn it of me. 
If you 
believe that YOURS is limited, YOU are limiting MINE. 
There is no 
order of difficulty in miracles because all of God's Sons are of equal 
value, and their equality is their Oneness. 
The whole power of God 
is in every part of Him, and nothing contradictory to His Will is ei¬ 
ther great or small. 
What does not exist HAS no size and no meas- 


442 ibid. 


44, Job 19:25 “For I know that my Redeemer lives, And He shall stand at last on the earth” 


403 


1-393 



Volume I Text 


ure. 
To God ALL things are possible. 
444 And to Christ it is given to 
be LIKE the Father. 
T(443) - 270 - 

T 10 H. 
The Problem and the Answer (Notes 984 8:88) 

T 10 H l. 
The world as YOU perceive it cannot have been created by 
the Father, for the world is NOT as you see it. 
God created ONFY 
the eternal, and everything YOU see is perishable. 
Therefore, there 
must be another world which you do NOT see. 
The Bible speaks of a 
NEW Fleaven and a NEW earth, 445 yet this cannot be literally true, 
for the eternal are not RE-created. 
To PERCEIVE anew is merely to 
perceive again, implying that before YOU WERE NOT PERCEIV¬ 
ING AT ALL. 
What, then, is the world that awaits your perception 
WEIEN YOU SEE IT? Every loving thought that the Son of God ever 
had is eternal. 
Those which his mind perceived in this world are the 
world's only reality. 
They are still perceptions, because he still be¬ 
lieves that he is separate, yet they are eternal, because they are lov¬ 
ing. 
And BEING loving, they are like the Father, and therefore can¬ 
not die. 


T 10 H 2. 
The real world can ACTUALLY BE PERCEIVED. 
All that is 
necessary is a willingness to perceive nothing ELSE. 
For if you per¬ 
ceive both good AND evil, you are accepting both the false AND the 
true, AND MAKING NO DISTINCTION BETWEEN THEM. 
The 
ego sees SOME good, but never ONLY good. 
That is WHY its per¬ 
ceptions are so variable. 
It does not reject goodness entirely, for this 
you could not accept, but it always ADDS something that is NOT 
real TO the real, thus CONFUSING ILLUSION AND REALITY. 
For 
perceptions cannot be partly true. 
If you believe in truth AND illu¬ 
sion you CANNOT TELL WHICH IS TRUE. 


T 10 H 3. 
To establish your PERSONAL autonomy, you tried to create 
UNLIKE your Father, BELIEVING what you made to be capable of 


444 Matthew 19:26 But Jesus looked at them and said to them, “With men this is impossible, but with 
God all things are possible.” 

443 Isaiah 65:17 For behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; And the former shall not be 
remembered or come to mind. 


Revelation 21:1 Now I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had 
passed away. 
Also there was no more sea. 



1-394 


404 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


BEING unlike Him. 
Yet everything in what you have made that IS 
true, IS like Him. 
Only this is the real world, and perceiving ONLY 
this will lead you to the real Heaven because IT WILL MAKE YOU 
CAPABLE OF UNDERSTANDING IT. 
The perception of goodness 
is not knowledge, but the denial of the OPPOSITE of goodness en¬ 
ables you to perceive a condition in which opposites do not exist. 

And this IS the condition of knowledge. 
WITHOUT this awareness, 
you have NOT met its conditions, and until you do you will not 
know that it is yours already. 
T(444) - 271 - 

T 10 H 4. 
You have made many ideas which you have placed between 
yourselves and your Creator, and these beliefs are the world as YOU 
perceive it. 
Truth is not absent here, but it IS obscure. 
You do not 
know the difference between what you have made, and what God 
created, and so you do not know the difference between what you 
have made, and what YOU have created. 
To believe that you can 
perceive the real world is to believe that you can know yourself. 
You 
CAN know God, because it is His Will to BE known. 
The real world 
is all that the Holy Spirit has saved for you, out of what you have 
made, and to perceive only this is salvation, because it is the recog¬ 
nition that reality is ONLY WHAT IS TRUE. 


T 10 H 5. 
This is a very simple course. 
Perhaps you do not feel that a 
course which, in the end, teaches nothing more than that only reality 
is true is necessary. 
BUT DO YOU BELIEVE IT? When you have 
perceived the real world, you will recognize that you did NOT be¬ 
lieve it. 
But the swiftness with which your new and ONLY real per¬ 
ception will be translated into knowledge, will leave you only an 
instant to realize that this judgment is true. 
And then everything 
you made will be forgotten, the good and the bad, the false and the 
true. 
For as Heaven and earth become one, even the real world will 
vanish from your sight. 
The end of the world is not its destruction, 
but its TRANSLATION into Heaven. 
The RE-INTERPRETATION of 
the world is the transfer of ALL perception to knowledge. 



405 


1-395 


Volume I Text 


T 10 H 6. 
The Bible tells you to become as little children. 
446 Little chil¬ 
dren recognize that they do not understand what they perceive, and 
so they ASK WHAT IT MEANS. 
Do not make the mistake of believ¬ 
ing that YOU understand what YOU perceive, for its meaning IS lost 
to you. 
But the Holy Spirit has saved its meaning FOR you, and if 
you will LET Him interpret it FOR you. 
He will restore what you 
have thrown away. 
As long as you THINK YOU KNOW its mean¬ 
ing, you will see no need to ask it OF Him. 
You do not know the 
meaning of ANYTHING you perceive. 
NOT ONE THOUGHT YOU 
HOLD IS WHOLLY TRUE. 


T 10 H 7. 
The recognition of this is your firm beginning. 
You are not 
misguided; you have accepted no guide at all. 
Instruction in percep¬ 
tion is your T(445) - 272 - great need, FOR YOU UNDERSTAND 
NOTHING. 
RECOGNIZE this, but do not accept it, for understand¬ 
ing is your inheritance. 
Perceptions are learned, and you are not 
without a Teacher. 
But your willingness to learn of Him depends on 
your willingness to question EVERYTHING you have learned OF 
YOURSELF, for you who have learned amiss should not be your 
own teachers. 
No-one can withhold truth, except from himself. 
Yet 
God will not refuse the answer He GAVE you. 
Ask, then, for what is 
yours, but which you did NOT make, and do not defend yourself 
AGAINST truth. 


T 10 H 8. 
YOU made the problem which God HAS answered. 
Ask 
yourselves, therefore, but one simple question; "Do I want the prob¬ 
lem or do I want the answer?" Decide for the answer, and you WILL 
have it, for you will see it as it is, and it is yours already. 
447 You 
complain that this course is not sufficiently specific for you to un¬ 
derstand it AND USE IT. 
Yet it has been VERY specific, and YOU 
HAVE NOT DONE WHAT IT SPECIFICALLY ADVOCATES. 
This 
is not a course in the play of ideas, but in their PRACTICAL APPLI- 


446 Matthew 18:3 And said, “Assuredly, I say to you, unless you are converted and become as little 
children, you will by no means enter the kingdom of heaven.” 

44 1 John 3:2 Beloved, now we are children of God; and it has not yet been revealed what we shall be, 
but we know that when He is revealed, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. 



1-396 


406 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


CATION. 
Nothing could be more specific than to be told very 
clearly, that if you ask you WILL receive. 
448 

T to H 9. 
The Holy Spirit will answer EVERY specific problem, as 
long as you believe that problems ARE specific. 
His answer is both 
many and one, as long as you believe that the One IS many. 
Realize 
that YOU ARE AFRAID OF HIS SPECIFICITY, for fear of what you 
think it will DEMAND of you. 
Yet only by asking will you learn that 
nothing that is of God demands ANYTHING of you. 
God GIVES; 

He does NOT take. 
You are refusing to ask, because you believe that 
asking is TAKING, and you do not perceive it as sharing. 
The Holy 
Spirit will give you only what is yours, and will take nothing in re¬ 
turn. 
For what is yours IS everything, and you share it WITH God. 

This IS its reality. 
Would the Holy Spirit, Who wills only to RE¬ 
STORE, be capable of Misinterpreting the question you must ask to 
learn His answer? 

T 10 H 10. 
You HAVE heard the answer, but you have misunderstood 
the QUESTION. 
You have believed that to ask for guidance of the 
Holy Spirit, IS TO ASK FOR DEPRIVATION. 
Little children of God, 
you do not understand your Father. 
T(446) - 273 - You believe in a 
world that takes because you believe that you can get by taking. 
But 
BY that perception, you have lost sight of the real world. 
You are 
afraid of the world AS YOU SEE IT, but the real world is still yours 
for the asking. 
Do not deny it TO yourself, for it can ONLY free you. 

Nothing of God will enslave His Son, whom He created free and 
whose freedom is protected by HIS Being. 


T 10 H11. 
Blessed are you who will ask the truth of God without fear, 
for only thus can you learn that His answer IS the release from fear. 

Beautiful Child of God, you are asking only for what I promised 
you. 
Do you believe I would DECEIVE you? The Kingdom of 
Heaven IS within you. 
449 Believe that the truth is in me, for I KNOW 


448 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 

449 Luke 17:21 Nor will they say, “See here!' or “See there!' For indeed, the kingdom of God is within 
you.” 


407 


1-397 



Volume I Text 


that it is in YOU. 
God's Sons have nothing which they do not share. 

Ask for truth of any Son of God, and you have asked it of me. 
No 
one of us but has the answer in him, to give to anyone who asks it 
OF him. 
Ask anything of God's Son, and His Father will answer 
you, for Christ is not deceived in His Father and His Father is not 
deceived in Him. 


T 10 H 12. 
Do not, then, be deceived in your brother, and see only his 
loving thoughts as his reality, for by denying that his mind is split, 
YOU WILL HEAL YOURS. 
Accept him as his Father accepts him, 
and heal him unto Christ, for Christ is his healing AND YOURS. 

Christ is the Son of God Who is in no way separate from His Father, 
Whose EVERY thought is as loving as the Thought of His Father, by 
which He was created. 
Be not deceived in God's Son, for thereby 
you MUST be deceived in yourself. 
And being deceived in yourself 
you ARE deceived in your Father, in Whom no deceit is possible. 


T 10 H 13. 
In the real world, there is no sickness, for there is no sepa¬ 
ration and no division. 
Only loving thoughts are recognized, and 
because no-one is without YOUR help, the Help of God goes with 
YOU everywhere. 
As you become willing to ACCEPT this Help BY 
ASKING FOR IT, you will give it BECAUSE YOU WANT IT. 
Noth¬ 
ing will be beyond your healing power, because nothing will be de¬ 
nied your simple request. 
What problems will not disappear in the 
presence T(447) - 274 -of God's answer? Ask, then, to learn of the real¬ 
ity of your brother BECAUSE THIS IS WHAT YOU WILL PER¬ 
CEIVE IN HIM, and you will see YOUR beauty reflected in HIM. 


T 10 H14. 
Do not accept your brother's variable perception of himself, 
for his split mind is yours, and you will not accept YOUR healing 
without his. 
For you share the real world as you share Heaven, and 
his healing IS yours. 
To love yourself is to HEAL yourself, and you 
cannot perceive part of you as sick and achieve your OWN goal. 

Brother, we heal together as we live together, and love together. 
Be 
not deceived in God's Son, for he is one with himself, and One with 
his Father. 
Love him who is beloved of His Father, and you will 
learn of the Father's Love for YOU. 



1-398 


408 



Chapter 10 - God and the Ego 


T 10 H15. 
If you perceive offense in a brother, pluck the offense from 
your mind, 450 for you are offended by Christ, and are deceived in 
Him. 
HEAL in Christ and be not offended by Him, for there is no 
offense IN Him. 
If what you perceive offends you, you are offended 
in YOURSELF, and are condemning God's Son, whom God con¬ 
demned! not. 
Let the Holy Spirit remove ALL offense of God's Son 
against himself and perceive no-one but through HIS guidance, for 
He would save you from ALL condemnation. 
Accept His healing 
power, and use it for all He sends you, for He wills to heal the Son 
of God in whom He is not deceived. 


T 10 H 16. 
Children perceive terrifying ghosts and monsters and drag¬ 
ons, and they are terrified. 
But if they ask someone they trust for the 
REAL meaning of what they perceive, and are willing to LET THEIR 
INTERPRETATIONS GO IN FAVOR OF REALITY, their fear goes 
with them. 
When a child is helped to translate his "ghost" into a 
curtain, his "monster" into a shadow and his "dragon" into a dream, 
he is no longer afraid, and laughs happily at his own fear. 
You, my 
children, are afraid of your brothers, and of your Father and of 
YOURSELVES. 
But you are merely DECEIVED in them. 


T 10 H17. 
Ask what they ARE of the Teacher of Reality, and hearing 
His answer, you too will laugh at your fears and replace them with 
peace. 
For fear lies T(448) - 275 - not in reality, but in the minds of chil¬ 
dren who do not UNDERSTAND it. 
It is only their LACK OF UN¬ 
DERSTANDING that frightens them, and when they learn to per¬ 
ceive truly, they are not afraid. 
And because of this, they will ask for 
truth again, when they are frightened. 
It is not the REALITY of your 
brothers, or your Father, or yourself which frightens you. 
You do 
not know what they ARE, and so YOU perceive them as ghosts and 
monsters and dragons. 


T 10 H18. 
ASK of their reality from the One Who knows it, and He 
will tell you what they are. 
For you do NOT understand them, and 


4,0 Matthew 5:29 “If your right eye causes you to sin, pluck it out and cast it from you; for it is more 
profitable for you that one of your members perish, than for your whole body to be cast into hell.” 


409 


1-399 



Volume I Text 


because you are deceived by what you see, you NEED reality to 
dispel your fears. 
Would you not exchange your fears for truth if the 
exchange is yours for the asking? For if God is not deceived in you, 
you can be deceived only in YOURSELF. 
But you can learn the truth 
of yourself of the Holy Spirit, Who will teach you that, as part of 
God, deceit in YOU is impossible. 
When you perceive yourself 
without deceit, you will accept the real world in place of the false 
one you have made. 
And then your Father will lean down to you, 
and take the last step for you, by raising you unto Himself. 
T(449) - 
276 - 451 


451 September 8, 1966 


1-400 


PROOF 


410 


COPY 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


Chapter 11 - God's Plan for Salvation 

T 11 A. 
Introduction (Notes 997 8:101) 

THAI. 
You have been told not to make error real, and the way to do 
this is very simple. 
If you WANT to believe in error, you would 
HAVE to make it real, because it is not true. 
But TRUTH is real in its 
OWN right, and to believe in truth, YOU DO NOT HAVE TO DO 
ANYTHING. 
Understand that you do not respond to stimuli, but to 
STIMULI AS YOU INTERPRET THEM. 
Your interpretation thus 
becomes the JUSTIFICATION for the response. 
That is why analyz¬ 
ing the motives of others is hazardous to YOU. 
If you decide that 
someone is REALLY trying to attack you, or desert you or enslave 
you, you will respond as if he had actually DONE so, BECAUSE 
you have made his error REAL to you. 
To interpret error is to GIVE 
IT POWER, and, having done this, you WILL overlook truth. 


T 11 A 2. 
The analysis of ego motivation is very complicated, very ob¬ 
scuring, and NEVER without the risk of your own ego involvement. 

The whole process represents a clear-cut attempt to demonstrate 
YOUR OWN ability to understand what you perceive. 
This is dem¬ 
onstrated by the fact that you REACT to your interpretations as if 
they WERE correct, and control your reactions behaviorally, BUT 
NOT EMOTIONALLY. 
This is quite evidently a mental split, in 
which you have attacked the integrity of your mind, and pitted one 
level within it against another. 


T 11 B. 
The Judgment of the Holy Spirit (Notes 998 8:102) 

T 11 B 1 . 
There is but one interpretation of ALL motivation that 
makes any sense, and, because it is the Holy Spirit's judgment, it 
requires no effort at all on your part. 
Every loving thought is true. 

EVERYTHING ELSE is an appeal for healing and help. 
That is what 
it IS, regardless of the form it takes. 
Can anyone be justified in re¬ 
sponding with anger to a plea for help? No response can BE appro¬ 
priate EXCEPT the willingness to give it TO him, for this and ONLY 
this is what he is ASKING for. 
Offer him anything ELSE, and YOU 


411 


1-401 


Volume I Text 


are assuming the right to attack his reality, by interpreting it AS 
YOU SEE FIT. 


T 11 B 2. 
Perhaps the danger of this to your OWN mind is not yet 
fully apparent. 
But this by no means signifies that it is not perfectly 
clear. 
If you maintain T(450) - 277 - that an appeal for help is some¬ 
thing ELSE, you will REACT to something else, and your response 
will be inappropriate to reality as IT is, but NOT to your perception 
OF it. 
This is poor reality testing by definition. 
There is nothing to 
prevent you from recognizing ALL calls for help as exactly what 
they are, EXCEPT YOUR OWN PERCEIVED NEED TO ATTACK. 
It 
is only THIS that makes you willing to engage in endless "battles" 
with reality, in which you DENY the reality of the need for healing 
by making IT unreal. 


T ll B 3. 
You would not do this except for your UNWILLINGNESS to 
perceive reality, WHICH YOU WITHHOLD FROM YOURSELF. 
It is 
surely good advice to tell you not to judge what you do not under¬ 
stand. 
No-one with a personal investment is a reliable witness, for 
truth for him has become what he WANTS it to be. 
If you are un¬ 
willing to perceive an appeal for help AS WHAT IT IS, it is because 
YOU are unwilling to give help, AND RECEIVE IT. 
The analysis of 
the ego's "real" motivation is the modern equivalent of the inquisi¬ 
tion. 
For in both, a brother's errors are "uncovered," and he is then 
attacked FOR HIS OWN GOOD. 
What can this be, BUT projection? 
For HIS errors lay in the minds of his INTERPRETERS, for which 
they punished HIM. 


T ll B 4. 
Whenever you fail to recognize a call for help, you are RE¬ 
FUSING help. 
Would you maintain that you do not NEED it? Yet 
this IS what you are maintaining when you refuse to recognize a 
brother's appeal. 
For only by ANSWERING his appeal, can YOU be 
helped. 
Deny him YOUR help, and you will NOT perceive God's 
answer to YOU. 
The Holy Spirit does NOT need your help in inter¬ 
preting motivation, but you DO need HIS. 
ONLY appreciation is an 
appropriate response to your brother. 
Gratitude is due him for both 
his loving thoughts, and his appeals for help, for both are capable of 


1-402 


412 


Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


bringing love into YOUR awareness, IF YOU PERCEIVE THEM 
TRULY. 
And ALL your sense of strain comes from your attempts 
NOT to do just this. 


T 11 B 5. 
How simple, then, is God's plan for salvation. 
There is but 
one response to reality, for reality evokes no conflict at all. 
There is 
but one Teacher of Reality, Who understands what it is. 
He does 
NOT change His mind about reality, because REALITY does not 
change. 
Although YOUR T(45l) - 278 - interpretations of reality are 
meaningless in your divided state. 
His remain consistently true. 
He 
GIVES them to you because they are FOR you. 


T 11 B 6. 
Do not attempt to "help" a brother in YOUR way, for you 
cannot help YOURSELVES. 
But hear his call for the help of God, and 
you will recognize your OWN need for the Father. 
Your interpreta¬ 
tions of your brother's need is your interpretation of YOURS. 
By 
giving help, you are ASKING FOR IT. 
And if you perceive but one 
need 452 in yourself, you WILL be healed. 
For you will recognize 
God's answer as you want it to be, and if you want it in truth, it will 
be truly yours. 
Every appeal you answer in the Name of Christ, 
brings the remembrance of your Father closer to YOUR awareness. 

For the sake of YOUR need, then, hear every call for help as what it 
is, so God can answer YOU. 
T(452) -279 453 

T ll B 7. 
By applying the Holy Spirit's interpretation of the reactions 
of others more and more consistently, you will gain an increasing 
awareness that HIS criteria are equally applicable to YOU. 
For to 
RECOGNIZE fear is not enough to escape FROM it, although the 
recognition IS necessary to demonstrate the NEED for escape. 
The 
Holy Spirit must still TRANSLATE it into truth. 
If you were LEFT 
with the fear, having RECOGNIZED it, you would have taken a step 
AWAY from reality, not TOWARD it. 
Yet we have repeatedly em¬ 
phasized the need to recognize fear, and face it WITHOUT DIS¬ 
GUISE, as a crucial step in the undoing of the ego. 
Consider how 


452 Notes has “this one need” which appears more likely correct. 


453 Sept. 
9, ‘66 


413 


1-403 



Volume I Text 


well the Holy Spirit's interpretation of the motives of others will 
serve you then. 


T 11 B 8. 
Having taught you to accept only loving thoughts in others, 
and to regard everything else as an appeal for help. 
He has taught 
you that FEAR is an appeal for help. 
This is what RECOGNIZING it 
really means. 
If you do NOT PROTECT it, HE will re-interpret it. 

That is the ultimate value TO YOU in learning to perceive attack as 
a call for love. 
We have learned surely that fear and attack are inevi¬ 
tably associated. 
If ONLY attack produces fear, and if you see attack 
as the call for help that it IS, the REALITY of fear MUST dawn upon 
you. 
For fear IS a call for love, in unconscious recognition of what 
has been denied. 


T 11 C. 
The Mechanism of Miracles (Notes 1005 8:909) 

T11 c l. 
Fear is a symptom of your deep sense of loss. 
If, when you 
perceive it in others, you learn to SUPPLY the loss, the basic CAUSE 
of fear is removed. 
Thereby you teach yourself that fear does not 
exist IN YOU, for you have in YOURSELF, the means for removing 
it, and have DEMONSTRATED this by GIVING it. 
Fear and love are 
the only emotions of which you are capable. 
One is false, for it was 
made out of denial, and denial DEPENDS on the real belief in what 
is denied for its OWN existence. 
T(453) - 280 - 
T ll c 2. 
By interpreting fear correctly, as a POSITIVE AFFIRMA¬ 
TION OF THE UNDERLYING BELIEF IT MASKS, you are under¬ 
mining its perceived usefulness by rendering it useless. 
Defenses 
which do not work AT ALL are AUTOMATICALLY discarded. 
If 
you raise what fear conceals to CLEAR-CUT, UNEQUIVOCAL PRE¬ 
DOMINANCE, fear becomes meaningless. 
You have denied its 
power to conceal love, which was its only purpose. 
The mask which 
YOU have drawn across the face of Love has disappeared. 


T 11 C 3. 
If you would look upon Love, which IS the world's reality, 
how could you do better than to recognize, in every defense 
AGAINST it, the underlying appeal FOR it? And how could you 
better learn of its reality, than by answering the appeal for it by GIV¬ 


I-404 


414 


Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


ING it? The Holy Spirit's interpretation of fear DOES dispel it, for 
the AWARENESS of truth cannot BE denied. 
Thus does the Holy 
Spirit replace fear with love, and translate error into truth. 
And thus 
will YOU learn of Him how to replace your dream of separation 
with the fact of unity. 
For the separation is only the DENIAL of un¬ 
ion, and, correctly interpreted, attests to your eternal knowledge 
that union is true. 
T(454) - 281 - 

T 11 C 4. 
Miracles are merely the translation of denial into truth. 
If to 
love oneself is to HEAL oneself, those who are sick do NOT love 
themselves. 
Therefore, they are asking for the love that would heal 
them, but which they are DENYING TO THEMSELVES. 
If they 
knew the truth about themselves, they could not be sick. 
The task of 
the miracle-worker thus becomes to DENY THE DENIAL OF 
TRUTH. 
The sick must heal THEMSELVES, for the truth is IN them. 

But, having OBSCURED it, the light in ANOTHER mind must shine 
into theirs, because that light IS theirs. 


T ll c 5. 
The light in them shines as brightly, REGARDLESS of the 
density of the fog that obscures it. 
If you give no power to the fog to 
obscure the light, it HAS none, for it has power ONLY because the 
Son of God gave power TO it. 
He must HIMSELF withdraw that 
power, remembering that all power is of God. 
YOU CAN REMEM¬ 
BER THIS FOR ALL THE SONSHIP. 
Do not allow your brother not 
to remember, for his forgetfulness is YOURS. 
But YOUR remember¬ 
ing is HIS, for God cannot be remembered alone. 
THIS IS WHAT 
YOU HAVE FORGOTTEN. 
To perceive the healing of your brother 
as the healing of yourself, is thus the way to remember God. 
For you 
forgot your brothers WITH Him, and God's answer to your forget¬ 
ting is but the way to remember. 


T 11 C 6. 
Perceive in sickness but another call for love, and offer your 
brother what he believes he cannot offer HIMSELF. 
Whatever the 
sickness, there is but one remedy. 
You will be made whole as you 
MAKE whole, for to perceive in sickness the appeal for health, is to 
recognize in hatred the call for love. 
And to give a brother what he 
REALLY wants, is to offer it unto yourself. 
For your Father wills you 


415 


1-405 


Volume I Text 


to know your brother AS yourself. 
454 Answer HIS call for love, and 
YOURS is answered. 
Healing is the love of Christ for His Father, 
and for HIMSELF. 
T(455) - 282 - 455 

T ll c 7. 
You have no idea of the intensity of your wish to get rid of 
each other. 
This does NOT mean that you are not strongly impelled 
TOWARD each other, but it DOES mean that LOVE IS NOT THE 
ONLY EMOTION. 
Because your love has become more in aware¬ 
ness, the conflict can no longer be "settled" by your previous at¬ 
tempts to MINIMIZE the fear. 
The love makes attack untenable, 
BUT YOU STILL FEEL THE FEAR. 
Instead of trying to resolve it 
directly, you have a strong tendency to TRY TO ESCAPE FROM 
THE LOVE. 
Yet this is the LAST thing you would want to ESCAPE 
from. 
And even if you did, you can escape from everything ELSE, 
but not from this. 
Be glad indeed that there IS no escape from salva¬ 
tion. 
456 T(456) -283 457 

T ll c 8. 
You do not realize how much you hate each other. 
You will 
not get rid of this until you DO realize it, for UNTIL then, you will 
think you want to get rid of EACH OTHER and KEEP THE HA¬ 
TRED. 
Yet if you are each other's salvation, what can this mean ex¬ 
cept that you PREFER attack to salvation? Be glad that neither your 
reality nor your salvation is a matter of your preference, for you 
HAVE much cause for joy. 
But that the cause is NOT of your mak¬ 
ing is surely obvious. 
You DO hate and fear each other, and your 
love, which is very real, is TOTALLY obscured by it. 
How can you 
know the meaning of love UNLESS it is total? 


454 Leviticus 19:18 You shall not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the children of your 
people, but you shall love your neighbor as yourself: I am the LORD. 


Matthew 22:39 And the second is like it: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.” 

Matthew 25:40 “And the King shall answer and say to them, Truly I say to you, Inasmuch as you did 
it to one of the least of these My brothers, you have done it to Me.” 

455 Sept. 
13, 66 

456 This page and the next covering paragraphs T 11 C 7.though T 11 C 10. 
show up as Special Message 
7 and do not show up in the subsequent HLC manuscript, suggesting that the Scribes viewed this 
material as “private” and not part of the Course. 
While this page and the next have two separate dates 
typed at the beginning of each page, those dates may represent the date of typing rather than the date of 
original dictation. 
In the Notes this material shows up on pages 1011-1013 (N8:115) through (N8:117). 


457 Sept. 
14, ‘66 


1-406 


416 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


T 11 C 9. 
This will be a very difficult period for you, but it will not be 
so for long. 
You are in danger, but you WILL be helped, and noth¬ 
ing will happen. 
But you cannot remain in darkness, and this will 
BE the way out. 
Look as calmly as you can upon hatred, for if we 
are to deny the denial of truth, we must first RECOGNIZE what we 
are denying. 
Remember that knowledge PRECEDES denial, and 
that the separation was a descent from magnitude to littleness. 
And 
so the way back is to retrace the way to magnitude. 


T 11 C 10. 
Your hatred is not real. 
But it is real to you. 
IT HIDES 
WHAT YOU REALLY WANT. 
Surely you are willing to look upon 
what you do NOT want without fear, EVEN IF IT FRIGHTENS 
YOU, if you can thereby get rid of it? For you CANNOT escape sal¬ 
vation, and you WILL not escape fear until you WANT salvation. 


Be not afraid of this journey into fear, for it is not your destination. 

And we will walk through it in safety, for peace is not far, and you 
will be led in its light. 
T(457) - 284 - 

T ll c ll. 
Remember what we said about the frightening perceptions 
of little children, which terrify them because they do not understand 
them. 
If they ASK for enlightenment, AND ACCEPT IT, their fears 
vanish. 
But if they HIDE their nightmares, they will KEEP them. 
It is 
easy to help an uncertain child, for he recognizes that he does not 
know what his perceptions mean. 
But you believe you DO know. 

Little children, you are hiding your heads under the covers of the 
heavy blankets you have laid upon yourselves. 
You are hiding your 
nightmares in the darkness of your own certainty, and refusing to 
open your eyes and LOOK AT THEM. 


T 11 C 12. 
Let us not save nightmares, for they are not fitting offerings 
for Christ, and so they are not fit gifts for YOU. 
Take off the covers, 
and look at what you are afraid of. 
Only the ANTICIPATION will 
frighten you, for the reality of nothingness cannot be frightening. 


Let us not delay this, for your dream of hatred will not leave you 
without help, and help is here. 
Learn to be quiet in the midst of 
turmoil, for quietness is the END of strife, and this is the journey to 


417 


1-407 


Volume I Text 


peace. 
Look straight at every image that rises to delay you, for the 
goal is inevitable, because it is eternal. 


T ll c 13. 
The goal of love is but your right, and it belongs to you DE¬ 
SPITE your preference. 
YOU STILL WILL WHAT GOD WILLS, and 
no nightmare can defeat a Child of God in his purpose. 
For your 
purpose was given you by God, and you must accomplish it, BE¬ 
CAUSE it is His Will. 
Awake and remember your purpose, for it is 
YOUR will to do so. 
What has been accomplished FOR you MUST 
be yours. 
Do not let your hatred stand in the way of love, for 
NOTHING can withstand the love of Christ for His Father, or His 
Father's love for Him. 


T 11 C 14. 
A little while, and you WILL see me. 
458 Fori am not hidden 
because you are hiding. 
I will awaken you as surely as I awakened 
myself, for I awoke FOR you. 
In MY Resurrection is YOUR release. 

Our mission is to ESCAPE CRUCIFIXION; T(458) - 285 - not Redemp¬ 
tion. 
Trust in my help, for I did not walk alone, and I will walk with 
you, as our Father walked with me. 
Did you not know that I walked 
with Him in peace? And does not that mean that peace goes with US 
on the journey? 

T ll c 15. 
There is no fear in perfect love. 
459 We will but be making 
perfect TO you, what is ALREADY perfect IN you. 
You do not fear 
the UNKNOWN, but the KNOWN. 
You will not fail in your mis¬ 
sion, because I failed not in mine. 
Give me but a little trust, in the 
name of the COMPLETE trust I have in you, and we will easily ac¬ 
complish the goal of perfection together. 
For perfection IS, and can¬ 
not be denied. 
To deny the denial of perfection is not so difficult as 
the denial of truth. 
And what we can accomplish together MUST be 
believed, when you SEE it as accomplished. 
You who have tried to 
banish love have not succeeded. 
But you who choose to banish fear 
WILL succeed. 



158 John 16:16 “A little while, and you will not see Me; and again a little while, and you will see Me, 
because I go to the Father.” 

4?9 1 John 4:18 There is no fear in love: but perfect love casteth out fear, because fear hath punishment; 
and he that feareth is not made perfect in love. 



1-408 


418 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


T 11 C 16. 
The Lord is with you, 460 but you know it not. 
Yet your Re¬ 
deemer liveth, 461 and abideth in you in the peace out of which He 
was created. 
Would you not exchange THIS awareness for the 
awareness of your fear? When we have OVERCOME fear, not by 
hiding it, not by minimizing it, not by denying its full import in 
ANY way, THIS IS WHAT YOU WILL REALLY SEE. 
You cannot 
lay aside the obstacle to real vision without looking upon it, for to 
lay aside means to judge AGAINST. 
If YOU will look, the Holy 
Spirit will judge, AND WILL JUDGE TRULY. 
He cannot shine away 
what YOU keep hidden, for you have not offered it TO Him, and He 
CANNOT take it FROM you. 


T 11 C 17. 
We therefore are embarking on an organized, well- 
structured, and carefully planned program, aimed at learning how 
to offer to the Holy Spirit everything you do NOT want. 
HE knows 
what to DO with it. 
You do NOT know how to use what He knows. 

Whatever is revealed to Him that is not of God, is gone. 
But you 
must reveal it to YOURSELF in perfect willingness, for otherwise 
His knowledge remains useless TO you. 
Surely He will not fail to 
help you, since help is His ONLY purpose. 
Do you not have greater 
reason for fearing the world, as you perceive it, than for looking at 
the cause of fear, and letting it go forever? T(459) -286 462 


41,11 Judges 6:12 And the Angel of the LORD appeared to him, and said to him, “The LORD is with you, 
you mighty man of valor!” 

2nd Chronicles 15:2 And he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah 
and Benjamin: the LORD is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him he will be found of you; 
but if ye forsake him he will forsake you. 


Luke 1:28 And having come in, the angel said to her, “Rejoice, highly favored one, the Lord is with 
you; blessed are you among women!” 

461 Job 19:25 “But I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand up at the last upon the earth” 

462 Sept. 
16 


419 


1-409 



Volume I Text 

T 11 D. 
The Investment in Reality (Notes 1019 8:123) 

T ll D 1. 
1 once asked if you were willing to sell 463 all you have, and 
give to the poor and follow me. 
This is what I meant: If you had no 
investment in anything in this world, you could teach the poor 
where THEIR treasure IS. 
The poor are merely those who have in¬ 
vested wrongly, and they are poor indeed! And because they are in 
need, it is given to you to help them, since you are among them. 

Consider how perfectly your lesson would be learned, IF YOU 
WERE UNWILLING TO SHARE THEIR POVERTY. 
For poverty is 
lack, and there is but one lack, since there is but one need. 


T 11 D 2. 
Suppose a brother insists on having you do something you 
think you do not want to do. 
464 The very fact of his insistence should 
tell you that HE BELIEVES SALVATION LIES IN IT. 
If you insist on 
refusing, and experience a quick response of opposition, YOU are 
believing that YOUR salvation lies in NOT doing it. 
You, then, are 
making the same mistake that HE is, and are making his error real 
to both of you. 
Insistence means INVESTMENT, and what you in¬ 
vest in is ALWAYS related to your notion of salvation. 
The question 
is always two-fold; first, WHAT is to be saved, and second, how can 
it BE saved? 


463 Mark 10:21 Then Jesus, beholding him, loved him and said to him, “One thing you lack. 
Go, sell 
whatever you have and give it to the poor, and you shall have treasure in Heaven. 
And come, take up 
the cross and follow Me.” 

Matthew 19:21 Jesus said to him, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have and give to the 
poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow Me.” 

Luke 18:22 And when Jesus heard it, he said unto him, “One thing thou lackest yet: sell all that thou 
hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me.” 

464 Matthew 5:38-48 “Ye have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: but I 
say unto you, resist not him that is evil: but whosoever smiteth thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the 
other also. 
And if any man would go to law with thee, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak 
also. 
And whosoever shall compel thee to go one mile, go with him two. 
Give to him that asketh thee, 
and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away. 
Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shalt 
love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy: but I say unto you, love your enemies, and pray for them that 
persecute you; that ye may be sons of your Father who is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the 
evil and the good, and sendeth rain on the just and the unjust. 
For if ye love them that love you, what 
reward have ye? Do not even the publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye 
more than others? Do not even the Gentiles the same? Ye therefore shall be perfect, as your heavenly 
Father is perfect.” 


1-410 


420 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


T 11 D 3. 
Whenever you become angry 465 with a brother, for WHAT¬ 
EVER reason, you are believing that the EGO is to be saved, AND 
TO BE SAVED BY ATTACK. 
If HE attacks, you are agreeing with 
this belief, and if YOU attack, you are reinforcing it. 
REMEMBER 
THAT THOSE WHO ATTACK ARE POOR. 
Their poverty asks for 
gifts, NOT for further impoverishment. 
You who could help them 
are surely acting destructively, if you accept their poverty AS 
YOURS. 
If you had not invested AS THEY HAD, it would never oc¬ 
cur to you to overlook their need. 
T(460) -287 

T ll D 4. 
RECOGNIZE WHAT DOES NOT MATTER, and if your 
brothers ask you for something 466 "outrageous," do it BECAUSE it 
does not matter. 
Refuse, and your OPPOSITION establishes that it 
DOES matter to you. 
It is only you, therefore, who have MADE the 
request outrageous, for nothing can BE asked OF you, and EVERY 
request of a brother is FOR you. 
Why would you insist in DENYING 
him? For to do so is to deny yourself, and impoverish both. 
HE is 
asking for salvation, as YOU are. 
Poverty is of the ego, and never of 
God. 
No "outrageous" request CAN be made of one who recognizes 
what is valuable, and wants to accept nothing else. 


T 11 D 5. 
Salvation is for the mind, and it is attained through peace. 

This is the only thing that CAN be saved, and the ONLY way to 
save it. 
Any response OTHER than love, arises from a confusion 
about the "what" and the "how" of salvation. 
And this is the ONLY 
answer. 
Never lose sight of this, and never allow yourself to believe, 
even for an instant, that there is another answer. 
For you will surely 
place yourself among the poor, who do not understand that they 
dwell in abundance and that salvation is come. 
T(461) - 288 - 467 

T ll D 6. 
To identify with the ego is to attack yourself, and MAKE 
YOURSELF POOR. 
That is why everyone who identifies with the 


465 Matthew 5:22 “but I say unto you, that every one who is angry with his brother shall be in danger 
of the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council; and 
whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of the hell of fire.” 

466 Matthew 5:42 “Give to him that asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou 
away.” 

467 Sept. 
20, 1966 


421 


1-411 



Volume I Text 


ego FEELS DEPRIVED. 
What he EXPERIENCES is then depression 
or anger, but what he DID is to exchange his self-love for self-hate, 
MAKING HIM AFRAID OF HIMSELF. 
He does NOT realize this. 

Even if he is fully aware of ANXIETY, he does NOT perceive its 
source AS HIS OWN EGO IDENTIFICATION, and he ALWAYS 
tries to handle it by making some sort of insane "arrangement" with 
the world. 
He ALWAYS perceives this world as OUTSIDE HIM¬ 
SELF, for this is crucial to his adjustment. 
He does NOT realize that 
HE MAKES THIS WORLD, for there IS no world outside him. 


T ll D 7. 
If only the loving thoughts of God's Son ARE the world's 
reality, the real world MUST be IN HIS MIND. 
468 His insane 
thoughts, too, must be in his mind, but an INTERNAL conflict of 
this magnitude he cannot tolerate. 
For a split mind IS endangered, 
and the recognition that it encompasses COMPLETELY opposed 
thoughts within itself IS intolerable. 
Therefore, the mind projects the 
split, NOT the reality. 
EVERYTHING you perceive as the outside 
world, is merely your attempt to maintain your ego identification, 
for everyone believes that identification is salvation. 


T 11 D 8. 
But consider what has happened, for thoughts have conse¬ 
quences to the thinker. 
You are AT ODDS with the world as you 
perceive it because you think IT is antagonistic to you. 
THIS IS A 
NECESSARY CONSEQUENCE OF WHAT YOU HAVE DONE. 
You 
have projected outward what IS antagonistic to what is inward, and 
therefore you would HAVE to perceive it this way. 
That is why you 
MUST realize that your hatred IS in your mind, and NOT OUTSIDE 
IT, before you can get rid of it. 
And why you MUST get rid of it, BE¬ 
FORE you can perceive the world as it really is. 


T ll D 9. 
Long ago we said that God so loved the world 469 that He 
gave it TO His only-begotten Son. 
(that whosoever believeth on him 
should never see death). 
God DOES love the real world, and those 
who perceive its reality T(462) - 289 - CANNOT see the world of death. 



468 Notes adds “And everything else MUST be illusion” 

469 John 3:16 “For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth on him should not perish, but have eternal life.” 


1-412 


422 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


For death is not OF the real world, in which everything is eternal. 

God gave you the real world in exchange for the one you made, out 
of your split mind, and which IS the symbol of death. 
For if you 
could REALLY separate yourselves from the Mind of God, you 
WOULD die. 
And the world you perceive IS a world of separation. 


T 11 D 10. 
You were willing to accept even death to deny your Father. 

But Fie would not have it so, and so it is NOT so. 
You still could not 
will against Fiim, and that is why you have no control over the 
world you made. 
It is NOT a world of will, because it is governed by 
the desire to be unlike Fiim. 
And this desire IS NOT WILL. 
The 
world you made is therefore totally chaotic, governed by arbitrary 
and senseless "laws," and without meaning of ANY kind. 
For it was 
made out of what you do NOT want, projected FROM your mind, 
because you were AFRAID of it. 


T 11 D 11. 
Yet this world is ONLY in the mind of its maker, along with 
his REAL salvation. 
Do not believe it is outside of yourself, for only 
by recognizing WF1ERE it is, will you gain control over it. 
For you 
DO have control over your mind, for the mind is the mechanism of 
decision. 
If you will recognize that ALL attack which you perceive, 
is in your own mind, and NOWFIERE ELSE, you will at last have 
placed its source, and where it began it must end. 
For in this place 
also lies salvation. 
The altar of God, where Christ abideth, is there. 


T ll D 12. 
You have defiled the altar, but NOT the world. 
But Christ 
has placed the Atonement on the altar FOR you. 
Bring your percep¬ 
tions of the world to this altar, for it is the altar to truth. 
There you 
will see your vision changed, and there you will learn to see truly. 

From this place, where God and Elis Son dwell in peace, and where 
you are welcome, you will look out in peace, and behold the world 
truly. 
But to find the place, you must relinquish your investment in 
the world as YOU have projected it, allowing the Floly Spirit to pro¬ 
ject the real world TO you, from the altar of God. 
T(463) - 290 - 


423 


1-413 


Volume I Text 


T 11 E. 
Seeking and Finding (Notes 1026 8:130) 

T 11 E 1 . 
The ego is certain that love is dangerous, and this is AL¬ 
WAYS its central teaching. 
470 It never PUTS it this way; on the con¬ 
trary, everyone who believes that the ego is salvation is intensely 
engaged in the SEARCH for love. 
Yet the ego, though encouraging 
the search very actively, makes one proviso; - do not FIND it. 
Its dic¬ 
tates, then, can be summed up simply as, "Seek and do NOT 
find." 471 This is the ONE promise that it holds out to you, and the 
one promise IT WILL KEEP. 
For the ego pursues its goal with fa¬ 
natic insistence, and its reality-testing, though severely impaired, is 
completely consistent. 


T ll E 2. 
The search which the ego undertakes is therefore bound to 
be defeated. 
And since it also teaches that IT is your identification, 
its guidance leads you to a journey which MUST end in perceived 
SELF defeat. 
For the ego CANNOT love, and in its frantic search 
FOR love, it is seeking WHAT IT IS AFRAID TO FIND. 
The 
SEARCH is inevitable, because the ego is part of your mind, and be¬ 
cause of its source, the ego is not wholly split off, or it could not be 
believed at all. 
For it is your mind that BELIEVES in it, and gives 
existence TO it. 
Yet it is ALSO your mind that has the power to 
DENY its existence, and you will surely do so when you realize ex¬ 
actly what the journey it sets you IS. 


T ll E 3. 
It is surely obvious that no-one WANTS to find WHAT 
WOULD UTTERLY DEFEAT HIM. 
Being UNABLE to love, the ego 
would be totally inadequate in Love's presence, for it could not re¬ 
spond at all. 
YOU would HAVE to abandon its guidance, for it 
would be quite apparent that it had NOT taught you the response 
pattern you NEED. 
The ego will therefore DISTORT love, and teach 
you that LOVE calls forth the responses the ego CAN teach. 
Follow 
its teaching, then, and you will SEARCH for love, BUT WILL NOT 
RECOGNIZE IT. 



470 Notes has “teaching theme” instead of just “teaching.” 

471 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 


1-414 


424 





Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


T ll E 4. 
But DO you realize that the ego MUST set you on a journey 
that cannot BUT lead to a sense of futility and depression? To seek 
and NOT to find is hardly joyous. 
Is this the promise YOU would 
keep? The Holy Spirit offers you another promise, and one that will 
lead to joy. 
For T(464) - 291 - HIS promise is always, "Seek and you 
WILL find," 472 and under HIS guidance you cannot BE defeated. 
His 
is the journey to ACCOMPLISHMENT, and the goal HE sets before 
you He WILL GIVE YOU. 
For He will never deceive God's Son, 
Whom He loves with the love of the Father. 


T ll E 5. 
You WILL undertake a journey, because you are not at home 
in this world. 
And you WILL search for your home, whether you 
know where it is or not. 
If you believe it is OUTSIDE yourself, the 
search will be futile, for you will be seeking where it is NOT. 
You do 
not know how to look within yourself, for you DO NOT BELIEVE 
YOUR HOME IS THERE. 
Yet the Holy Spirit knows it FOR you, and 
He will guide you TO your home, because that is His Mission. 
As 
He fulfills HIS mission. 
He will teach you YOURS. 
For your mission 
is the same as His. 
By guiding your BROTHERS home, you are but 
following HIM. 


T ll E 6. 
Behold the Guide your Father gave you, that you might 
learn you have eternal life. 
For death is not your Father's Will nor 
yours, and whatever is true IS the Will of the Father. 
You pay no 
price for life, for that was given you, but you DO pay a price for 
death, and a very heavy one. 
If death is your treasure, you will sell 
everything else 473 to purchase it. 
And you will believe that you 
HAVE purchased it BECAUSE you have sold everything else. 
BUT 
YOU CANNOT SELL THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. 
Your inheri¬ 
tance can neither be bought NOR sold. 
474 There can BE no disinher- 


47:1 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened 
unto you.” 

473 Matthew 13:45-46 “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is a merchant seeking 
goodly pearls: and having found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought 
it.” 

474 Genesis 25:31-33 But Jacob said, “Sell me your birthright as of this day.” And Esau said, “Look, I 
am about to die; so what is this birthright to me?” Then Jacob said, “Swear to me as of this day.” So he 
swore to him, and sold his birthright to Jacob. 



425 


1-415 



Volume I Text 


ited parts of the Sonship, for God is whole, and all his extensions are 
like Him. 


T ll E 7. 
The Atonement was not the price of your wholeness, but it 
WAS the price of your AWARENESS of your wholeness. 
For what 
you chose to "sell" had to be kept FOR you, since you COULD not 
"buy" it back. 
Yet YOU must invest in it, not with money, but WITH 
YOUR SPIRIT. 
For Spirit is Will, and will IS the "price" of the King¬ 
dom. 
Your inheritance awaits only the recognition that you have 
BEEN redeemed. 
The Holy Spirit guides you into Life Eternal, but 
YOU must relinquish your investment in death, or you will not see 
it, though it is all around you. 
T(465) -292 475 

T 11 F. 
The Sane Curriculum (Notes 1031 8:135) 

T ll F l. 
Only love is strong because it is UNDIVIDED. 
The strong do 
not attack, because they see no need to do so. 
BEFORE the idea of 
attack can enter your mind, YOU MUST HAVE PERCEIVED 
YOURSELF AS WEAK. 
Because you had attacked yourself, and BE¬ 
LIEVED THAT THE ATTACK WAS EFFECTIVE, you behold your¬ 
self as weakened. 
No longer perceiving yourself and all your broth¬ 
ers as equal, AND REGARDING YOURSELF AS WEAKER, you at¬ 
tempt to "equalize" the situation YOU HAVE MADE. 
You use at¬ 
tack to do so, because you believe that ATTACK WAS SUCCESS¬ 
FUL IN WEAKENING YOU. 


T 11 F 2. 
That is why the recognition of your OWN invulnerability is 
so important in the restoration of your sanity. 
For if you accept your 
invulnerability, you are recognizing that ATTACK HAS NO EF¬ 
FECT. 
Although you have attacked yourself, and very brutally, you 
will demonstrate that NOTHING HAPPENED. 
Therefore, by attack¬ 
ing, you have NOT DONE ANYTHING. 
Once you realize this, there 
is no longer any SENSE in attack, for it manifestly DOES NOT 
WORK, it cannot PROTECT you. 
But the recognition of your invul¬ 
nerability has more than merely negative value. 



475 Sept. 
21, ‘66 


1-416 


426 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


T ll F 3. 
If your attacks on yourself FAILED to weaken you, YOU 
ARE STILL STRONG. 
You therefore HAVE no need to "equalize" 
the situation to ESTABLISH your strength. 
But you will never real¬ 
ize the utter uselessness of attack, EXCEPT by recognizing that your 
attack on YOURSELF had no effects. 
For others DO react to attack, if 
they perceive it, and if you ARE trying to attack them, you will be 
unable to avoid interpreting this as reinforcement. 
The ONLY place 
where you can cancel out ALL reinforcement, is IN YOURSELF. 
For 
YOU are always the first point of your attack, and if this has never 
been it HAS no consequences. 
T(466) - 293 - 476 

T 11 F 4. 
The Holy Spirit's Love is your strength, for yours is divided, 
and therefore not real. 
You could not trust your own love, when you 
have ATTACKED it. 
You cannot learn of PERFECT love with a split 
mind, because a split mind HAS MADE ITSELF A POOR 
LEARNER. 
You tried to make the separation eternal because you 
wanted to RETAIN the characteristics of creation, WITH YOUR 
OWN CONTENT. 


T ll F 5. 
Creation is NOT of you, and poor learners need special 
teaching. 
You have learning handicaps in a very literal sense. 
There 
are areas in your learning skills that are so impaired, that you can 
progress only under constant clear-cut direction, provided by a 
teacher who can TRANSCEND your limited resources. 
He BE¬ 
COMES your resource, because OF YOURSELF, you CANNOT 
learn. 
477 The learning situation in which you place yourself IS im¬ 
possible, and IN this situation, you clearly require a special teacher, 
and a special curriculum. 


T ll F 6. 
Poor learners are not good choices for teachers, either for 
themselves or for anyone else. 
You would hardly turn to THEM to 
establish the curriculum by which they can ESCAPE their limita¬ 
tions. 
If they understood what is BEYOND them, they would not BE 


476 Sept. 
22, 1966 

477 John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do 
nothing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like 
manner.” 


427 


1-417 



Volume I Text 


handicapped. 
You do NOT know the meaning of love, and this IS 
your handicap. 
Do not attempt to teach YOURSELVES what you do 
not understand, and do not try to set up curriculum goals, where 
yours have clearly failed. 
For YOUR learning goal has been NOT TO 
LEARN, and this CANNOT lead to successful learning. 


T 11 F 7. 
You cannot transfer what you have not learned, and the im¬ 
pairment of the ability to generalize is a crucial learning failure. 

Would you ask those who have FAILED to learn, what learning aids 
are FOR? THEY DO NOT KNOW. 
For if they could INTERPRET the 
aids correctly, they would have LEARNED from them. 
We have 
said that the ego's rule is, "Seek and do NOT find." Translated into 
curricular terms, this is the same as saying, "TRY to learn but DO 
NOT SUCCEED. 
"T(467) -294 

T 11 F 8. 
The result of this curriculum goal is obvious. 
Every legiti¬ 
mate teaching aid, every real instruction, and every sensible guide 
to learning, WILL BE MISINTERPRETED. 
For they are all for learn¬ 
ing FACILITATION, which this strange curriculum goal is 
AGAINST. 
If you are trying to learn how NOT to learn, and using 
the AIM of teaching TO DEFEAT ITSELF, what can you expect BUT 
confusion? The CURRICULUM does not make any sense. 


T 11 F 9. 
This kind of learning has so weakened your mind that you 
CANNOT love. 
For the curriculum you have chosen is AGAINST 
love, and amounts to a course in HOW TO ATTACK YOURSELF. 
A 
necessary minor, supplementing this major curriculum goal, is in 
learning how NOT to overcome the split which made this goal be¬ 
lievable. 
And YOU can NOT overcome it, for all YOUR learning is 
on its BEHALF. 


T ll F10. 
Yet your will speaks against your learning, as your learning 
speaks against your will. 
And so you fight AGAINST learning, and 
SUCCEED, for that is your will. 
But you do NOT realize, even yet, 
that there IS something you DO will to learn, and that you CAN 
learn it, because it IS your will to do so. 
You who have tried to learn 
what you do NOT will, should take heart. 
For though the curricu¬ 
lum you set yourself is depressing indeed, it is merely ridiculous, IF 


1-418 


428 


Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


YOU LOOK AT IT. 
Is it POSSIBLE that the way to achieve a goal is 
NOT TO ATTAIN IT? 

T ll F ll. 
Resign NOW as your own teachers. 
THIS resignation will 
NOT lead to depression. 
It is merely the result of an honest ap¬ 
praisal of what you have taught yourselves, and of the learning out¬ 
comes which have resulted. 
Under the proper learning conditions, 
which you can neither provide nor understand, you will become 
excellent learners AND teachers. 
But it is not so yet, and will not BE 
so until the whole learning situation, as YOU have set it up, is re¬ 
versed. 
T(468) - 295 - 

T 11 F 12. 
Your learning POTENTIAL, properly understood, is limit¬ 
less, BECAUSE IT WILL LEAD YOU TO GOD. 
You can TEACH the 
way to Him AND learn it, if you will follow the Teacher Who knows 
it, and the curriculum for learning it. 
The curriculum is totally un¬ 
ambiguous, because the goal is NOT divided, and the means and 
the end are in COMPLETE accord. 
YOU need offer only UNDI¬ 
VIDED ATTENTION. 
Everything else will be GIVEN you. 
For it is 
YOUR will to learn aright, and NOTHING can oppose the will of 
God's Son. 
His learning is as unlimited as HE is. 
T(469) - 296 - 478 

T 11 G. 
The Vision of Christ (Notes 1043 8:147/149) 

T 11 G1. 
The ego is trying to teach you how to gain the whole world, 
and lose your own Soul. 
479 The Holy Spirit teaches that you CAN¬ 
NOT lose your Soul and there IS no gain in the world, for OF IT¬ 
SELF, it profits nothing. 
480 To invest in something WITHOUT profit 
is surely to impoverish yourself, and the overhead is high. 
Not only 
is there no profit in the investment, but the cost TO YOU is enor¬ 
mous. 
For this investment costs you the world's reality, by DENY¬ 
ING YOURS, and gives you nothing in return. 
You CANNOT sell 
your Soul, but you CAN sell your AWARENESS of it. 



478 Sept. 
21, 1966. 


479 Mark 8:36 “For what will it profit a man if he gains the whole world, and loses his own soul?” 

480 Proverbs 10:2 Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, But righteousness delivers from death. 

John 6:63 “It is the Spirit who gives life; the flesh profits nothing. 
The words that I speak to you are 
spirit, and they are life.” 


429 


1-419 



Volume I Text 


T ll G 2. 
You cannot perceive the soul, but you will not KNOW it 
while you perceive anything ELSE as more valuable. 
The Holy Spirit 
is your strength because He perceives nothing BUT your soul AS 
YOU. 
He is perfectly aware that you do NOT know yourselves, and 
perfectly aware of how to teach you what you are. 
BECAUSE He 
loves you. 
He will gladly teach you what He loves, for He wills to 
share it. 
Remembering you always. 
He cannot let you forget your 
worth. 
For the Father never ceases to remind Him of His Son, and 
He never ceases to remind His Son of the Father. 
God is in your 
memory BECAUSE of Him. 


T ll G 3. 
You CHOSE to forget your Father, but you did NOT will to 
do so. 
And THEREFORE, you CAN decide otherwise. 
As it was MY 
decision, so is it YOURS. 
YOU DO NOT WANT THE WORLD. 
The 
only thing of value in it is whatever part of it YOU look upon with 
love. 
This GIVES it the only reality it will ever have. 
ITS value is 
NOT in itself, but yours IS in you. 
As self value comes from self EX¬ 
TENSION, so does the PERCEPTION of self value come from the 
projection of loving thoughts outward. 


T ll G 4. 
Make the world real unto YOURSELF, for the real world is 
the gift of the Holy Spirit, and so it BELONGS to you. 
Correction is 
for all who cannot see. 
To open the eyes of the blind is the Holy 
Spirit's mission, for He knows that they have not LOST their vision, 
but merely sleep. 
He would awaken them from the sleep of forget¬ 
ting, to the remembering of God. 
Christ's eyes are open, and He will 
look upon whatever you see with love T(470) - 297 - if you accept His 
vision as yours. 


T ll G 5. 
The Holy Spirit keeps 481 the vision of Christ for every Son of 
God who sleeps. 
In His sight, the Son of God is perfect, and He 
longs to share His vision WITH you. 
He will SHOW you the real 
world, because God GAVE you Heaven. 
Through Him, your Father 
calls His Son to remember. 
The awakening of His Son begins with 


481 The Urtext manuscript has “keep” (no ‘s’), an apparent typo. 
It’s correct, as we have it here with the 
s, in the Notes. 



1-420 


430 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


his investment in the REAL world, and BY this, he will learn to RE- 
invest in HIMSELF. 
For reality is one with the Father AND the Son, 
and the Holy Spirit blesses the real world in Their Name. 


T ll G 6. 
When you have seen this real world, as you will surely do, 
you WILL remember us. 
But you must learn the cost of sleeping, 
AND REFUSE TO PAY IT. 
Only then will you decide to awake. 
And 
then the real world will spring to your sight, for Christ has never 
slept. 
He is waiting to be seen, for He has never lost sight of YOU. 

He looks quietly on the real world, which He would SHARE with 
you, because He knows of the Father's love for Him. 
And knowing 
this. 
He would give you what is yours. 


T ll G 7. 
In perfect peace. 
He waits for you at His Father's altar, hold¬ 
ing out the Father's love to you, in the quiet light of the Holy Spirit's 
blessing. 
For the Holy Spirit will lead everyone home to his Father, 
where Christ waits as his Self. 
Every Child of God is one in Christ, 
for his Being is in Christ, as Christ's is in God. 
Christ's love for you 
is His love for His Father, which He knows because He knows His 
Father's love for Him. 
When the Holy Spirit has at last led you to 
Christ, at the altar to His Father, perception fuses into knowledge, 
because perception has become so holy that its transfer to Holiness 
is merely its natural extension. 


T ll G 8. 
Love transfers to love without ANY interference, for the 
situations are identical. 
Only the ABILITY to make this transfer is 
the product of learning. 
As you perceive more and more common 
elements in ALL situations, the transfer of your training, under the 
Holy Spirit's guidance increases and becomes generalized. 
Gradu¬ 
ally, you learn to apply it to everyone and everything, for its appli¬ 
cability IS universal. 
When this has been T(47l) - 298 - accomplished, 
perception and knowledge have become so similar that they share 
the unification of the Laws of God. 
What is One cannot be perceived 
as separate, and the denial of the separation IS the reinstatement of 
knowledge. 


T ll G 9. 
At the altar of God, the holy perception of God's Son be¬ 
comes so enlightened that light streams into it, and the Spirit of 


431 


1-421 


Volume I Text 


God's Son shines in the Mind of the Father, and becomes one with it. 

Very gently does God shine upon Himself, loving the extension of 
Himself which is His Son. 
The world has no purpose, as it blends 
into the Purpose of God. 
For the real world has slipped quietly into 
Heaven, where everything eternal in it has always been. 
There, the 
Redeemer and the redeemed join in perfect love of God, and of each 
other. 
Heaven is your home, and being in God, it must ALSO be in 
you. 


T 11 H. 
The Guide for Miracles (Notes 1049 8:153) 

T 11 H 1. 
Miracles demonstrate that learning has occurred under the 
right guidance, for learning is invisible, and what has been learned 
can be recognized ONLY by its RESULTS. 
Its GENERALIZATION is 
demonstrated as you use it in more and more situations. 
You will 
recognize that you have learned there is no order of difficulty in 
miracles, when you have applied them to ALL situations. 
For there 
IS no situation to which miracles do not apply, and by applying 
them TO all situations, you will gain the REAL world. 
For in this 
holy perception, you will be made whole, and the Atonement will 
radiate from YOUR acceptance of it FOR YOURSELF, to everyone 
the Holy Spirit sends you for your blessing. 


T ll H 2. 
In every Child of God His blessing lies, and in your blessing 
of the Children of God is His blessing to YOU. 
Everyone in the 
world must play his part in the redemption of the world, to recog¬ 
nize that the world HAS BEEN redeemed. 
You cannot see the in¬ 
visible. 
But if you see its effects, YOU KNOW IT MUST BE THERE. 

By perceiving what it DOES, you recognize its being. 
And by 
WHAT it does, you learn what it IS. 
You cannot SEE your abilities, 
but you gain confidence in their EXISTENCE as they enable you to 
ACT. 
And the results, of your actions you CAN see. 
T(472) - 299 - 
T ll H 3. 
The Holy Spirit is invisible, but you CAN see the results of 
His Presence, and through them, you will learn that He is there. 

What He enables you to do is clearly NOT of this world, for miracles 
violate every law of reality, as this world judges it. 
Every law of 
time and space, of magnitude and mass, of prediction and control, is 


1-422 


432 


Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


transcended, for what the Holy Spirit enables you to do is clearly 
beyond ALL of them. 
Perceiving His RESULTS, you will understand 
where He MUST be, and finally KNOW what He is. 
T(473) - 300 - 482 

T ll H 4. 
You cannot see the Holy Spirit, but you CAN see His 
MANIFESTATIONS. 
And UNLESS YOU DO, you will not realize 
He is there. 
Miracles are His witnesses, and speak for his Presence. 

What you cannot see becomes real to you only through the wit¬ 
nesses who speak FOR it. 
For you can be AWARE of what you can¬ 
not see, and it can become compellingly real to you, as its presence 
becomes manifest THROUGH you. 
Do His work, for you SHARE in 
His function. 
As your function in Heaven is creation, so your func¬ 
tion on earth is healing. 
God shares His function with you in 
Heaven, and the Holy Spirit shares HIS with you on earth. 


T ll H 5. 
As long as you believe you have two functions, so long will 
you need correction. 
For this belief is the DESTRUCTION of peace, a 
goal in direct opposition to the Holy Spirit's purpose. 
You see what 
you expect, and you expect what you invite. 
Your perception is the 
result of your invitation, coming to you as you sent for it. 
Whose 
manifestations would you see? Of whose presence would you be 
convinced? For you will believe in what you MANIFEST, and as 
you look out so will you see in. 
Two ways of looking at the world 
are in your mind, and your perception will reflect the guidance you 
chose. 


T 11 H 6.1 am the manifestation of the Holy Spirit, and when you see 
me, it will be because you have invited Him. 
For He will send you 
His witnesses if you will but look upon them. 
Remember always 
that you see what you seek, 483 for what you seek you WILL find. 
The 
ego finds what it seeks, and ONLY that. 
It does not find love, for 
that is NOT what it is seeking. 
But seeking and finding are the same, 
and if you seek for two goals, you will FIND them, but you will 
RECOGNIZE NEITHER. 
For you will think they are the same, BE- 


482 Sept. 
26, 1966 

483 Deuteronomy 4:29 But from there you will seek the LORD your God, and you will find Him if you 
seek Him with all your heart and with all your soul. 



433 


1-423 



Volume I Text 


CAUSE YOU WANT THEM BOTH. 
The mind always strives for 
integration, and if it is split, and WANTS TO KEEP THE SPLIT, it 
will believe it has ONE goal by MAKING IT ONE. 


T11 H 7. 
We said before that WHAT you project is up to you, but it is 
NOT up to you WHETHER to project, for projection is a law of 
mind. 
Perception IS T(474) - 301 - projection, and you look in BEFORE 
you look out. 
As you look IN, you choose the guide for seeing, and 
THEN look out, and behold his witnesses. 
This is why you find 
what you seek. 
What you want IN YOURSELF you will make mani¬ 
fest by PROJECTION, and you will accept it FROM the world, be¬ 
cause you put it there BY wanting it. 


T 11 H 8. 
When you think you are projecting what you do NOT want, 
it is still because you DO want it. 
This leads DIRECTLY to dissocia¬ 
tion, for it represents the acceptance of two goals, each perceived IN 
A DIFFERENT PLACE, separated from each other BECAUSE YOU 
MADE THEM DIFFERENT. 
The mind then sees a divided world 
OUTSIDE ITSELF, but NOT within. 
This gives it an illusion of integ¬ 
rity, and enables it to believe that IT is pursuing one goal. 
As long as 
you perceive the world as split, YOU are not healed. 
For to be 
healed is to pursue one goal, because you have ACCEPTED only 
one, and WANT but one. 


T ll H 9. 
When you want ONLY love, you will see nothing else. 
The 
contradictory nature of the witnesses you perceive is merely the re¬ 
flection of your conflicting invitations. 
You have looked upon your 
minds, and accepted opposition there, having SOUGHT it there. 
But 
do not then believe that the witnesses FOR opposition are true for 
they attest only to your DECISION about reality, returning to you 
the message you GAVE them. 
Love is recognized by its messengers. 

If you make it manifest, its messengers will come to you, because 
you INVITED them. 


T 11 H 10. 
The power of decision is your one remaining freedom as a 
prisoner of this world. 
YOU CAN DECIDE TO SEE IT RIGHT. 
What 
you MADE of it is NOT its reality, for its reality is only what you 
GAVE it. 
You cannot REALLY give anything BUT love to anyone or 


1-424 


434 


Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


anything, nor can you really receive anything else FROM them. 
If 
you think you have received anything ELSE, it is because you have 
looked within, and thought you saw the power to GIVE something 
else WITHIN YOURSELF. 
It was only THIS decision that T(475) - 302 - 
determined what you found, for it was the decision OF WHAT YOU 
SOUGHT. 


T 11 H11. 
You are afraid of me because you looked within, and are 
afraid of what you saw. 
Yet you COULD not have seen reality, for 
the reality of your mind is the loveliest of God's Creations. 
Coming 
only from God, its power and grandeur could only bring you peace, 
IF YOU REALLY LOOKED UPON IT. 
If you are afraid, it is because 
you saw something THAT IS NOT THERE. 
Yet in this same place 
you could have looked upon me and all your brothers, in the perfect 
safety of the Mind that created us. 
For we are there in the peace of 
the Father, Who wills to PROJECT His peace through YOU. 


T ll H12. 
When you have accepted your mission to PROJECT peace, 
you will FIND it. 
For by MAKING IT MANIFEST you will SEE it. 
Its 
holy witnesses will surround you, because you CALLED UPON 
THEM, and they will come to you. 
I HAVE heard your call, and I 
have answered it, but you will not look upon me nor hear the an¬ 
swer which you sought. 
But that is only because you do not yet 
want ONLY that. 
Yet as I become more real to you, you will learn 
that you DO want only that. 
And you will see me as you look 
within, and we will look upon the world as God created it together. 

Through the eyes of Christ, ONLY the real world exists, and can BE 
seen. 


T ll H13. 
As you decide so will you see. 
And all that you see but wit¬ 
nesses to your decision. 
When you look within and see me, it will be 
because you have decided to manifest truth. 
And as you manifest it, 
you will see it both without AND within, for you will see it without 
BECAUSE you saw it first within. 
Everything you behold without is 
a JUDGMENT of what you beheld within. 
If it is YOUR judgment, it 
will be wrong, for judgment is not your function. 
If it is the judg¬ 
ment of the Holy Spirit, it will be right, for judgment IS His function. 



435 


1-425 


Volume I Text 


You share His function only by judging AS HE DOES, reserving no 
judgment at all unto yourselves. 
For you will judge AGAINST your¬ 
selves, but He will judge FOR you. 


T 11 H 14. 
Remember, then, that whenever you look without and react 
unfavorably to what you see, you have judged yourself unworthy, 
and have condemned yourself T(476) - 303 - to death. 
The death pen¬ 
alty is the ego's ultimate goal, for it fully believes that you are a 
criminal, as deserving of death as God knows you are deserving of 
life. 
The death penalty never leaves the ego's mind, for that is what 
it always reserves for you in the end. 
Wanting to kill you, as the fi¬ 
nal expression of its feeling for you, it lets you live but to await 
death. 
It will torment you while you live, but its hatred is not satis¬ 
fied until you die. 
For your destruction is the one end toward which 
it works, and the only one with which it will be satisfied. 


T 11 H 15. 
The ego is not a traitor to God to Whom treachery is impos¬ 
sible. 
But it IS a traitor TO YOU who believe you have been treach¬ 
erous to your Father. 
That is why the undoing of GUILT is an essen¬ 
tial part of the Holy Spirit's teaching. 
For as long as you feel guilty, 
you are listening to the voice of the ego, which tells you that you 
HAVE been treacherous to God, AND THEREFORE DESERVE 
DEATH. 
You will think that death comes from Him, AND NOT 
FROM THE EGO, because, by confusing yourself WITH the ego, 
you believe that YOU want death. 
And from what you want God 
does NOT save you. 


T ll H 16. 
When you are tempted to yield to the desire for death, re¬ 
member that I DID NOT DIE. 
You will realize that this is true when 
you look within and SEE me. 
Would I have overcome death for my¬ 
self alone? And would eternal life have been given me of the Father 
UNLESS he had also given it to YOU? When you learn to make ME 
manifest, YOU will never see death. 
For you will have looked upon 
the deathless IN YOURSELF, and you will see only the eternal, as 
you look out upon a world that cannot die. 
T(477) -304 484 


484 Sept. 
30, ‘66 


1-426 


436 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


T 111. 
Reality and Redemption (Notes 1059 8:163) 

T 1111. 
Do you REALLY believe that you can kill the Son of God? 

Lor the Lather has hidden His Son safely within Himself, and kept 
him far away from your destructive thoughts, but YOU know nei¬ 
ther the Lather nor the Son because of them. 
You ATTACK the real 
world every day and every hour and every minute, and yet you are 
surprised that you cannot SEE it. 
If you seek love to attack it, YOU 
WILL NEVER FIND IT. 
For if love is SHARING, how can you find it 
except through ITSELF? Offer it and it will come to you, because it is 
drawn to itself. 
But offer attack and it will remain hidden, for it can 
live only in peace. 


T ll 12. 
God's Son is as safe as his Father, for the Son knows his Fa¬ 
ther's protection and CANNOT fear. 
His Father's love holds him in 
perfect peace, and needing nothing, he asks for nothing. 
But he is far 
from you whose Self he is, for you chose to attack him, and he dis¬ 
appeared from your sight into his Father. 
HE did not change, but 
YOU did. 
For a split mind and all its works were not created by the 
Father, and could not live in the knowledge OF Him. 


T 11 1 3. 
When you made what is NOT true visible, what is true be¬ 
came INVISIBLE. 
Yet it cannot be invisible in ITSELF, for the Holy 
Spirit sees it with perfect clarity. 
It IS invisible to you, because you 
are looking at SOMETHING ELSE. 
Yet it is no more up to you to 
decide what is visible and what is invisible, than it is up to you to 
decide what reality is. 
What can be seen is WHAT THE HOLY 
SPIRIT SEES. 
The definition of reality is God's, not yours. 
HE cre¬ 
ated it, and He knows what it is. 
You who knew have forgotten. 


And unless He had given you a way to remember, you would have 
condemned yourselves to oblivion. 
T(478) -305 

T ll 14. 
Because of your Father's love, you can NEVER forget Him. 

For no one can forget what God Himself placed in his memory. 
You 
can DENY it, but you CANNOT LOSE IT. 
A Voice will answer 
every question you ask, and a vision will correct the perception of 
everything you see. 
For what you have made invisible is the only 
truth, and what you have not heard is the only answer. 
For God 


437 


1-427 


Volume I Text 


would reunite you with yourself, and did not abandon you in your 
seeming distress. 
You are waiting only for Him, and do not know it. 

But His memory shines in your minds, and cannot BE obliterated. 
It 
is no more past than future, being forever always. 


T 111 5. 
You have but to ask for this memory, and you WILL remem¬ 
ber. 
But the memory of God cannot shine in a mind which has 
MADE it invisible, and WANTS TO KEEP IT SO. 
For the memory of 
God can dawn only in a mind that wills to remember, and that has 
relinquished the insane desire to control reality. 
You who cannot 
even control yourselves, should hardly aspire to control the uni¬ 
verse. 
But look upon what you have made of it, and rejoice that it is 
not so. 


T 1116 . 
Son of God, be not content with nothing. 
What is not real 
cannot BE seen, and has NO value. 
God could not offer His Son 
what has no value, nor could His Son receive it. 
You were redeemed 
the instant you thought you had deserted Him. 
Everything you 
made has never been, and is invisible because the Holy Spirit does 
not see it. 
Yet what He DOES see is yours to behold, and through 
HIS vision YOUR perception is healed. 
You have made the INvisible 
the only truth that this world holds. 
Valuing nothing, you have 
sought it and found it. 
By making nothing real to you, you have 
SEEN it. 
T(479) -306 

T ll 17. 
BUT IT IS NOT THERE. 
And Christ is invisible to you BE¬ 
CAUSE OF WHAT YOU HAVE MADE VISIBLE TO YOURSELVES. 

Yet it does not matter how much distance you have tried to inter¬ 
pose between your awareness and Truth. 
God's Son CAN be seen, 
because His Vision is shared. 
The Holy Spirit looks upon Him, and 
sees nothing else in you. 
What is invisible to you is perfect in His 
sight, and encompasses ALL of it. 
He has remembered YOU because 
He forgot not the Father. 


T ll 18 . 
You looked upon the unreal and found despair. 
But by 
SEEKING the unreal, what else COULD you find? The UNreal 
world IS a thing of despair, for it can never be. 
And you who share 
God's Being with Him, could never be content WITHOUT reality. 



1-428 


438 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


What God did not give you has no power over you, and the attrac¬ 
tion of love for love remains irresistible. 
For it is the function of love 
to unite all things unto itself, and to hold all things together by ex¬ 
tending its wholeness. 


T 1119. 
The real world was given you by God, in loving exchange for 
the world YOU made, and which you SEE. 
But take it from the hand 
of Christ, and look upon it. 
ITS reality will make everything ELSE 
invisible, for beholding it is TOTAL perception. 
And as you look 
upon it, you will remember that it was always so. 
Nothingness will 
become invisible, for you will at last have seen truly. 
Redeemed per¬ 
ception is easily translated into knowledge, for ONLY perception is 
capable of error. 
And perception has never been. 
Being corrected, it 
gives place to knowledge, which is forever the ONLY reality. 
The 
Atonement is but the way back to what was never lost. 
Your Father 
could not cease to love Flis Son. 
T(480) -307 

T 11 J. 
Guiltlessness and Invulnerability (Notes 1064 8:168) 

T 11J 1. 
If you did not feel guilty, you could not attack. 
For condem¬ 
nation is the root of attack. 
It is the judgment of one mind by an¬ 
other as UNWORTHY of love, and DESERVING of punishment. 
But 
herein lies the split. 
For the mind that judges, perceives itself as 
SEPARATE from the mind being judged, believing that by punish¬ 
ing ANOTHER, IT will escape punishment. 
All this is but the delu¬ 
sional attempt of the mind to deny itself, and ESCAPE THE PEN¬ 
ALTY OF DENIAL. 
It is NOT an attempt to RELINQUISH denial, 
but to HOLD ON TO IT. 
For it is guilt that has obscured the Father 
to you, and it is guilt that has driven you insane. 
The acceptance of 
guilt into the mind of God's Son was the beginning of the separa¬ 
tion, as the acceptance of the Atonement is its end. 


T ll J 2. 
The world you see is the delusional system of those made 
mad by guilt. 
Look carefully at this world, and you will realize that 
this is so. 
For this world is the symbol of punishment, and all the 
laws which seem to govern it are the laws of death. 
Children are 
born into it through pain and in pain. 
Their growth is attended by 
suffering, and they learn of sorrow and separation and death. 
Their 


439 


1-429 


Volume I Text 


minds are trapped in their brain, and its powers decline 485 if their 
bodies are hurt. 
They seem to love, yet they desert, and are deserted. 

They appear to lose what they love, perhaps the most insane belief 
of all. 
And their bodies wither and gasp and are laid in the ground, 
and seem to be no more. 
Not one of them but has thought that God 
is cruel. 


T ll J 3. 
If this were the real world, God WOULD be cruel. 
For no fa¬ 
ther could subject his children to this as the price of salvation, and 
be loving. 
LOVE DOES NOT KILL TO SAVE. 
For if it did, attack 
WOULD be salvation, and this is the ego's interpretation, NOT 
God's. 
T(481) -308 Only the world of guilt could demand this, for only 
the guilty could CONCEIVE of it. 
Adam's "sin" could have touched 
none of you, had you not believed that it was the FATHER Who 
drove him out of Paradise. 
486 For it is in THAT belief that knowledge 
of the Father was lost, for it is only those who do not understand 
Him that COULD believe it. 


T ll J 4. 
This world IS a picture of the crucifixion of God's Son. 
And 
until you realize that God's Son CANNOT be crucified, this is the 
world you will see. 
But you will NOT realize this, until you accept 
the eternal fact that GOD'S SON IS NOT GUILTY. 
He DESERVES 
only love, because he has GIVEN only love. 
He cannot be con¬ 
demned, because he has never condemned. 
The Atonement is the 
final lesson he need learn, for it teaches him that, never having 
sinned, HE HAS NO NEED OF SALVATION. 


T ll J 5. 
Long ago we said that the Holy Spirit shares the goal of all 
good teachers, whose ultimate aim is to make themselves unneces¬ 
sary, by teaching their pupils all they know. 
The Holy Spirit wills 
ONLY this, for sharing the Father's love for His Son, He wills to re¬ 
move all guilt from his mind, that he may remember his Father in 


i ; : Our copy of the Urtext manuscript has an “s” handwritten after “decline” such that it becomes 
“powers declines” which is a problem of agreement in number. 
The Notes has it as this appears to have 
been originally typed, “powers decline” and so we are going with that option. 


486 Genesis 3:23-24 Therefore the LORD God sent him out of the garden of Eden to till the ground from 
which he was taken. 
So He drove out the man; and He placed cherubim at the east of the garden of 
Eden, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to guard the way to the tree of life. 



1-430 


440 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


peace. 
For peace and guilt are antithetical, and the Father can BE 
remembered ONLY in peace. 
Love and guilt cannot coexist, and to 
accept one is to DENY the other. 


T 11 J 6. 
Guilt hides Christ from your sight, for it is the denial of the 
blamelessness of God's Son. 
In this strange world which you have 
made, the Son of God LIAS sinned. 
Flow could you SEE him, then? 
By making HIM invisible, the world of retribution rose in the black 
cloud of guilt which you accepted, and you hold it dear. 
For the 
blamelessness of Christ is the proof that the ego never was, and can 
never be. 
Without guilt the ego LIAS no life, and God's Son T(482) - 
309 IS without guilt. 


T 11J 7. 
As you look upon yourselves and judge what you do hon¬ 
estly, as you have been asked to do, you may be tempted to wonder 
how you can be guiltless. 
But consider this. 
You are NOT guiltless in 
time, but IN ETERNITY. 
You HAVE "sinned" IN THE PAST, but 
there IS no past. 
Always has no direction. 
Time seems to go in one 
direction, but when you reach its end, it will roll up like a long car¬ 
pet that has spread along the past behind you, and will disappear. 


As long as you believe the Son of God is guilty, you will walk along 
this carpet, believing that it leads to death. 
And the journey will 
seem long and cruel and senseless, for so it is. 


T ll J 8. 
The journey which the Son of God has set HIMSELF is fool¬ 
ish indeed. 
But the journey on which his Father sets him is one of 
release and joy. 
The Father is not cruel, and His Son CANNOT hurt 
himself. 
The retaliation which he fears, AND WHICH HE SEES, will 
never touch him, for although he BELIEVES in it, the Holy Spirit 
KNOWS it is not true. 
He stands at the end of time, where YOU 
must be, because He is WITH you. 
He has ALWAYS undone every¬ 
thing unworthy of the Son of God, for such was His mission, given 
BY God. 
And what God gives HAS always been. 


T ll J 9. 
You will see me as you learn the Son of God is guiltless. 
He 
has always sought his guiltlessness, and he has FOUND it. 
For eve¬ 
ryone is seeking to escape from the prison he has made, and the way 


441 


1-431 


Volume I Text 


to find release is not denied him. 
487 Being IN him, he has found it. 

WHEN he finds it is only a matter of time, and time is but an illu¬ 
sion. 
For the Son of God is guiltless NOW, and the brightness of his 
purity shines untouched forever in God's Mind. 
God's Son will 
ALWAYS be as he was created. 
Deny YOUR world, and judge him 
not. 
For his eternal guiltlessness is in the mind of his Father, and 
protects him forever. 
T(483) -310 

T ll J10. 
When you have accepted the Atonement for yourselves, 
you will realize that THERE IS NO GUILT IN GOD'S SON. 
And 
ONLY as you look upon him as guiltless, can you understand his 
Oneness. 
For the IDEA of guilt brings a belief of condemnation of 
one by another, projecting separation in place of unity. 
You can 
condemn only yourself, and by doing so, you cannot know that you 
are God's Son. 
For you have denied the condition of his Being, 
which is his perfect blamelessness. 
Out of Love he was created, and 
in Love he abides. 
Goodness and mercy 488 have always followed 
him, for he has always extended the Love of his Father. 


T ll J ll. 
As you perceive the holy companions who travel with you, 
you will realize that there IS no journey, but only an awakening. 
The 
Son of God, who sleepeth not, has kept faith with his Father FOR 
you. 
There is no road to travel ON, and no time to travel 
THROUGH. 
For God waits not for His Son in time, being forever 
unwilling to be without him. 
And so it has always been. 
Let the ho¬ 
liness of God's Son shine away the cloud of guilt that darkens your 


487 Luke 4:18-19 “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me. 
Because he anointed me to preach good tidings to 
the poor: He hath sent me to proclaim release to the captives, And recovering of sight to the blind, To 
set at liberty them that are bruised, To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.” 

The above reference to release of prisoners, or captives, being the assignment from God which Jesus 
claims appears to be a quote from the prophet Isaiah: 

Isaiah 61:1-2 The spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because the LORD hath anointed me to preach 
good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the 
captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the 
LORD... 


488 Psalm 23:6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me 

All the days of my life; 

And I will dwell in the house of the LORD 
Forever. 



1-432 


442 



Chapter 11 - God’s Plan for Salvation 


mind, and by accepting his purity AS yours, learn of him that it IS 
yours. 


T ll J12. 
You are invulnerable BECAUSE you are guiltless. 
You can 
hold on to the past ONLY through guilt. 
For guilt establishes that 
you WILL BE punished for what you have done, and thus depends 
on one-dimensional time, proceeding from past to future. 
No-one 
who believes this, can understand what ALWAYS means. 
And 
therefore guilt MUST deprive you of the appreciation of eternity. 

You are immortal BECAUSE you are eternal, and always MUST be 
now. 
Guilt, then, is a way of holding past and future in your minds, 
to ensure the ego's continuity. 
For if what it HAS BEEN 489 WILL BE 
punished, it's continuity WOULD be guaranteed. 
T(484) -311 

T ll J13. 
But the guarantee of your continuity is God's, not the ego's. 

And immortality is the opposite of time, for time passes away, while 
immortality is constant. 
Accepting the Atonement teaches you 
WHAT IMMORTALITY IS, for by accepting your guiltlessness, you 
learn that the past has never been, and so the future is needless. 
The 
future IN TIME is ALWAYS associated with expiation, and ONLY 
guilt could induce a sense of NEED for expiation. 
Accepting the 
guiltlessness of the Son of God AS YOURS is therefore God's way of 
reminding you of His Son, and what he is in truth. 
For God has 
never condemned His Son, and being guiltless, he IS eternal. 


T 11J 14. 
You cannot dispel guilt by making it real, and THEN aton¬ 
ing for it. 
For this is the ego's plan, which it offers INSTEAD of dis¬ 
pelling it. 
The ego believes in ATONEMENT THROUGH ATTACK, 
being fully committed to the insane notion that attack IS salvation. 

And YOU who cherish guilt must ALSO believe it, for how else but 
by identifying WITH the ego, could you hold dear what you do not 
want? 

T ll J15. 
The ego teaches you to attack yourself BECAUSE you are 
guilty, and this MUST INCREASE the guilt, for guilt is the RESULT 
of attack. 
In the ego's teaching, then, there IS no escape from guilt. 


489 Notes has “DONE” instead of “BEEN” 


443 


1-433 



Volume I Text 


For attack MAKES GUILT REAL, and if it is real there IS no way to 
overcome it. 
The Holy Spirit dispels it simply through the calm rec¬ 
ognition that it has never been. 
As He looks upon the guiltless Son 
of God, he KNOWS this is true. 
And being true for you, you CAN¬ 
NOT attack yourself, for WITHOUT guilt, attack is impossible. 
You, 
then, ARE saved BECAUSE God's Son is guiltless. 
And being 
wholly pure, you ARE invulnerable. 
T(485) -312 490 


490 Oct. 
4, 1966 


1-434 


PROOF 


444 


COPY 



Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 

T 12 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1075 8:179) 

T 12 A l. 
The ultimate purpose of projection, as the ego uses it, is 
ALWAYS to get rid of guilt. 
But, characteristically, it attempts to get 
rid of it FROM ITS VIEWPOINT ONLY. 
For much as the ego wants 
to RETAIN guilt, YOU find it intolerable. 
For guilt stands in the way 
of your remembering God, Whose pull is so strong that YOU cannot 
resist it. 
On this issue, then, the deepest split of all occurs, for if you 
are to RETAIN guilt, as the ego insists, YOU CANNOT BE YOU. 

Only by persuading you that IT is you, could the ego possibly in¬ 
duce you to PROJECT guilt, and thereby keep it in your mind. 


T 12 A 2. 
But consider how strange a solution the ego's arrangement 
is. 
You PROJECT guilt to get rid of it, but you actually merely 
CONCEAL it. 
You DO experience guilt FEELINGS, but you have 
NO IDEA OF WFIY. 
On the contrary, you associate them with a 
weird assortment of EGO ideals, which the ego claims you have 
failed. 
But you have no idea that you are failing the Son of God, by 
seeing HIM as guilty. 
Believing you are no longer YOU, you do not 
realize that you are failing YOURSELF. 


T 12 B. 
Crucifixion by Guilt (Notes 1076 8:180) 

T 12 B 1. 
The darkest of your hidden cornerstones holds your belief in 
guilt from your own awareness. 
For in that dark and secret place is 
the realization that you have betrayed God's Son, by condemning 
him to death. 
You do not even SUSPECT that this murderous but 
insane idea lies hidden there. 
For the ego's destructive urge is so in¬ 
tense, that nothing short of the crucifixion of God's Son can ulti¬ 
mately satisfy it. 
It does not know who the Son of God IS, because it 
is blind. 
But let it perceive guiltlessness ANYWHERE, and it will try 
to destroy it, because it is afraid. 


T 12 B 2. 
Much of the ego's strange behavior is directly attributable to 
its definition of guilt. 
To the ego, THE GUILTLESS ARE GUILTY. 

Those who do NOT attack are its "enemies," because, by NOT 


445 


1-435 


Volume I Text 


VALUING its interpretation of salvation, they are in an excellent 
position to LET IT GO. 
They have approached the darkest and 
deepest cornerstone in the ego's foundation, and while it can with¬ 
stand your raising all else to question, it guards this one secret with 
T(486) 313 its life, for its existence DOES depend on keeping this se¬ 
cret. 
And it is this secret that we must look upon calmly, for the ego 
cannot protect you AGAINST truth, and in ITS presence the ego is 
dispelled. 


T 12 B 3. 
In the calm light of truth, let us recognize that YOU BE¬ 
LIEVE YOU HAVE CRUCIFIED GOD'S SON. 
You have not admit¬ 
ted this "terrible" secret, because you still wish to crucify him, IF 
YOU COULD FIND HIM. 
But the wish has hidden him from you, 
because it is very fearful, AND YOU ARE AFRAID TO FIND HIM. 

You have handled this wish TO KILL YOURSELF by NOT KNOW¬ 
ING WHO YOU ARE, and identifying with something ELSE. 
You 
have projected guilt blindly and indiscriminately, but you have 
NOT uncovered its source. 
For the ego DOES want to kill you, and if 
you identify WITH it, you MUST believe ITS GOAL IS YOURS. 


T 12 B 4. 
We once said that the crucifixion is the symbol of the ego. 

When it was confronted with the REAL guiltlessness of God's Son, it 
DID attempt to kill him. 
And the reason it gave was that guiltless¬ 
ness is blasphemous to God. 
To the ego, THE EGO IS GOD, and 
guiltlessness MUST be interpreted AS THE FINAL GUILT WHICH 
FULLY JUSTIFIES MURDER. 
You do not yet understand that ALL 
your fear of this course stems ultimately from this interpretation, 
but if you will consider your reactions TO it, you will become in¬ 
creasingly convinced that this is so. 


T 12 B 5. 
This course has explicitly stated that its goal FOR YOU is 
happiness and peace. 
Yet you are AFRAID of it. 
You have been told 
again and again that it will make you free, yet you react as if it is 
trying to IMPRISON you. 
Most of the time you DISMISS it, BUT 
YOU DO NOT DISMISS THE EGO'S THOUGHT SYSTEM. 
You 
HAVE seen its results and you STILL lack faith in it. 
You MUST, 
then, believe that, by NOT learning the course, YOU ARE PRO- 


1-436 


446 


Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


TECTING YOURSELF. 
And you do NOT realize that it is only your 
guiltlessness that CAN protect you. 
T(487) -314 
T 12 B 6. 
The Atonement has always been interpreted as the release 
from guilt, and this is correct, if it is understood. 
Yet even when I 
have interpreted it FOR you, you have rejected it, and have NOT 
accepted it FOR YOURSELF. 
You have recognized the futility of the 
ego and its offerings, but though you do not want it, you will not 
look upon the alternative with gladness. 
YOU ARE AFRAID OF 
REDEMPTION, and YOU BELIEVE IT WILL KILL YOU. 
Make no 
mistake about the depth of your fear. 
For you believe that, in the 
presence of truth, you will turn on yourself and DESTROY yourself. 


T 12 B 7. 
Little children, this is not so. 
Your "guilty secret" is nothing, 
and if you will but bring it to light, the Light WILL dispel it. 
And 
then no dark cloud will remain between you and the remembrance 
of your Father. 
For you will remember His guiltless Son, who did 
not die because he is immortal. 
And you will see that you were re¬ 
deemed WITH him, and have never been separated FROM him. 
In 
THIS understanding lies your remembering, for it is the recognition 
of love WITHOUT fear. 
There will be great joy in Heaven 491 on your 
homecoming, and the joy will be YOURS. 
For the redeemed son of 
man 492 IS the guiltless Son of God, and to recognize HIM, IS your 
redemption. 
T(488) -315 493 

T 12 C. 
The Fear of Redemption (Notes 1082 8:186) 

T 12 C 1. 
You may wonder why it is so crucial that you look upon 
your hatred, and realize its full extent. 
And you may think that it 


491 Luke 15:7 “I say to you that likewise there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents 
than over ninety-nine just persons who need no repentance.” 

492 The term “Son of Man” is frequently used in the Bible to refer to “people” in general, and then by 
Jesus to describe himself. 
The Greek original actually could be translated into English as “one” or 
“someone” or “anyone” being a rather generic term for “human.” Due to the large number of such 
references, we choose simply two typical ones. 


Numbers 23:19 God is not a man, that he should lie; Neither the son of man, that he should repent: 
Hath he said, and shall he not do it? Or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good? 

Matthew 8:20 And Jesus said to him, “Foxes have holes and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of 
Man has nowhere to lay His head.” 

493 Oct. 
5, ‘66 


447 


1-437 



Volume I Text 


would be easy enough for the Holy Spirit to show it to you, and dis¬ 
pel it WITHOUT the need for you to raise it to awareness yourself. 

But there is one more complication which you have interposed be¬ 
tween yourself and the Atonement, that you do not yet realize. 
We 
have said that no one will countenance fear, IF HE RECOGNIZES 
IT. 
But in your disordered state, YOU ARE NOT AFRAID OF FEAR. 

You do not LIKE it, but it is NOT your desire to attack which really 
frightens you. 
You are not seriously disturbed by your hostility. 
You 
keep it hidden, because you are MORE afraid of what it covers. 


T 12 c 2. 
You could look even upon the ego's darkest cornerstone 
WITHOUT fear, if you did not believe that, WITHOUT THE EGO, 
you would find, within yourself, something you fear even more. 

YOU ARE NOT AFRAID OF CRUCIFIXION. 
Your real terror is of 
REDEMPTION. 
Under the ego's dark foundation is the memory of 
God, and it is of THIS that you are really afraid. 
For this memory 
would INSTANTLY restore you to your proper place, and it is THIS 
place that you have sought to LEAVE. 


T 12 C 3. 
Your fear of attack is nothing, compared to your fear of love. 

You would be willing to look upon your savage wish to kill God's 
Son, IF YOU DID NOT BELIEVE THAT IT SAVES YOU FROM 
LOVE. 
For this wish CAUSED the separation. 
You have protected it, 
because you do not WANT the separation healed, and you realize 
that, by REMOVING the dark cloud that obscures it, your love for 
your Father would IMPEL you to answer His call, and leap into 
Heaven. 
You believe that attack is salvation, to PREVENT you from 
this. 
For still deeper than the ego's foundation, and MUCH stronger 
than IT will ever be, is your intense and burning love of God, AND 
HIS FOR YOU. 
T(489) -316 

T 12 c 4. 
THIS IS WHAT YOU REALLY WANT TO HIDE. 
In hon¬ 
esty, is it not harder for you to say "I love" than "I hate?" For you 
associate love with weakness and hatred with strength, and your 
REAL power seems to you as your real weakness. 
For you could 
NOT control your joyous response to the call of love if you heard it, 
and the whole world you THINK you control WOULD vanish. 
The 


1-438 


448 


Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


Holy Spirit, then, seems to be ATTACKING YOUR FORTRESS, for 
you would SHUT OUT GOD, and He does not will to BE excluded. 


T 12 c 5. 
You have built your whole insane belief system, because you 
think you would be HELPLESS in God's Presence. 
And you would 
SAVE yourself from His love, because you think it would crush you 
into nothingness. 
You are afraid it would sweep you AWAY from 
yourself, AND MAKE YOU LITTLE. 
For you believe that magnitude 
lies in defiance, and attack is grandeur. 
YOU THINK YOU HAVE 
MADE A WORLD THAT GOD WOULD DESTROY. 
And by loving 
Him, WHICH YOU DO, you would throw this world away, 

WHICH YOU WOULD. 


T 12 c 6. 
Therefore, you have used the world to COVER YOUR 
LOVE, and the deeper you go into the blackness of the ego's founda¬ 
tion, the CLOSER you come to the Love that is hidden beneath it. 

AND IT IS THIS THAT FRIGHTENS YOU. 
You can accept insanity, 
BECAUSE YOU MADE IT. 
But you cannot accept love, BECAUSE 
YOU DID NOT. 
You would rather be slaves of the crucifixion, than 
Sons of God in redemption. 
For your INDIVIDUAL death is more 
valued than your living Oneness, and what is GIVEN you, is not so 
dear as what you MADE. 
You are more afraid of God than of the 
ego, and love cannot enter where it is not welcome. 
But hatred 
CAN, for it enters of ITS will, and cares not for YOURS. 


T 12 C 7. 
The reason you must look upon your delusions, and not 
keep them hidden, is that THEY DO NOT REST ON THEIR OWN 
FOUNDATION. 
In concealment, they APPEAR to do so, and thus 
they seem to be SELF-SUSTAINED. 
THIS is the fundamental illu¬ 
sion on which they rest. 
For BENEATH them, and concealed as long 
as THEY are hidden, is the loving mind that THOUGHT it made 
them in anger. 
And the pain in this mind is so apparent, when it is 
uncovered, that its need of healing cannot BE denied. 
Not all the 
tricks and games that you have offered it can heal it, T(490) -317 for 
HERE is the REAL crucifixion of God's Son. 


T 12 c 8. 
And yet he is NOT crucified. 
For here is both his pain AND 
his healing, for the Holy Spirit's vision is merciful, and His remedy 


449 


1-439 


Volume I Text 


is quick. 
Do not HIDE suffering from His sight, but bring it gladly 
TO Him. 
Lay before His eternal sanity ALL your hurt, and LET Him 
heal you. 
Do not leave any spot of pain hidden from His Light, and 
search your minds carefully for any thoughts which you may fear to 
uncover. 
For He will heal every little thought that you have kept to 
hurt you, and cleanse it of its littleness, restoring it to the magnitude 
of God. 


T 12 C 9. 
Beneath all your grandiosity, which you hold so dear, is 
your real call for help. 
For you call for love to your Father, as your 
Father calls you to Himself. 
In that place, which you have hidden, 
you will only to unite with the Father, in loving remembrance of 
Him. 
You will find this place of truth as you see it in your brothers, 
for though they may deceive themselves, like you they long for the 
grandeur that is in them. 
And perceiving it you will WELCOME it, 
and it will be yours. 
For grandeur is the RIGHT of God's Son, and 
no illusions can satisfy him, or save him from what he IS. 


T 12 C 10. 
Only his love is real, and he will be content ONLY with his 
reality. 
Save him from his illusions, that you may accept the magni¬ 
tude of your Father in peace and joy. 
But exempt no one from your 
love, or you will be hiding a dark place in your minds, where the 
Holy Spirit is not welcome. 
And you will exempt YOURSELF from 
His healing power, for by not offering total love, YOU will not be 
healed completely. 
And healing must be as complete as fear, for 
love cannot enter where there is one spot of fear to mar its welcome. 

T 12 C 11. 
You who prefer specialness to sanity could not obtain it in 
your right minds. 
You were at peace until you asked for special fa¬ 
vor, and God did not give it. 
For the request was alien to Him, and 
you could not ask this of a Father who truly loved His Son. 
There¬ 
fore, you made of Him an UNloving father, demanding of Him 
what only such a father COULD give. 
And the peace of God's Son 
was shattered, T(491) -318 for he no longer understood his Father. 
He 
feared what he had made, but still more did he fear his REAL Fa¬ 
ther, having attacked his glorious equality WITH Him. 



1-440 


450 


Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


T 12 C 12. 
In peace he needed nothing, and asked for nothing. 
In war 
he DEMANDED everything, and FOUND nothing. 
For how could 
the gentleness of love respond to his demands, EXCEPT by depart¬ 
ing in peace, and returning to the Father? 494 If the Son did not wish 
to REMAIN in peace, he could not remain at all. 
For a darkened 
mind cannot live in the light, and it must seek a place of darkness, 
where it can believe it is where it is NOT. 
God did not ALLOW this 
to happen. 
But you DEMANDED that it happen, and therefore be¬ 
lieved that it was so. 


T 12 C 13. 
To SINGLE OUT is to MAKE ALONE, and thus MAKE 
LONELY. 
God did not do this to you. 
Could He SET YOU APART, 
KNOWING that your peace lies in His Oneness? He denied you 
only your request for pain, for suffering is not of His creation. 
Hav¬ 
ing GIVEN you creation. 
He could not take it FROM you. 
He could 
but answer your insane request with a sane answer, which would 
abide with you in your insanity. 
AND THIS HE DID. 
No-one who 
hears His answer but will give up insanity. 
For His answer is the 
reference point BEYOND delusions, from which you can look back 
on them, and see them as insane. 
But seek this place and you WILL 
find it, for Love is in you, and will lead you there. 
T(492) -319 495 

T 12 D. 
Healing and Time (Notes 1091 8:195) 

T 12 D 1. 
And now the reason why you are afraid of this course 
should be apparent. 
For this is a course on love, because it is about 
YOU. 
You have been told that your function in this world is healing, 
and your function in Heaven is creating. 
The ego teaches that your 
function on earth is destruction, and that you have no function AT 
ALL in Heaven. 
It would thus destroy you here, and bury you here, 
leaving you no inheritance except the dust out of which it thinks 


494 Luke 2:29 “Lord, now You are letting Your servant depart in peace, According to Your word;” 
John 14:12 “Most assuredly, I say to you, he who believes in Me, the works that I do he will do also; 
and greater works than these he will do, because I go to My Father.” 

John 14:28 You have heard Me say to you, “I am going away and coming back to you.' If you loved 
Me, you would rejoice because I said, “I am going to the Father,' for My Father is greater than I. 


495 Oct. 
6, ‘66 


451 


1-441 



Volume I Text 


you were made. 
496 While it is reasonably satisfied with you, as its 
reasoning goes, it offers you oblivion. 
When it becomes overtly sav¬ 
age, it offers you hell. 


T 12 D 2. 
Yet neither oblivion nor hell is as unacceptable to you as 
Heaven. 
For your definition of Heaven IS hell and oblivion, and the 
REAL Heaven is the greatest threat you think you COULD experi¬ 
ence. 
For hell and oblivion are ideas which YOU made up, and you 
are bent on DEMONSTRATING their reality, TO ESTABLISH 
YOURS. 
If THEIR reality is questioned, you believe that YOURS is. 

For you believe that ATTACK established your reality, and that 
your DESTRUCTION is the final proof THAT YOU WERE RIGHT. 

T 12 D 3. 
Under the circumstances, would it not be MORE DESIR¬ 
ABLE to have been wrong, even apart from the fact that you WERE 
wrong? For while it could perhaps be argued that death suggests 
there WAS life, no one would claim that it proves there IS life. 
And 
even the PAST life, which death might indicate, could only have 
been futile if it must come to this, and NEEDS this to prove that it 
WAS. 
You question Heaven, but you do NOT question this. 
You 
could heal and be healed, if you DID question it. 
And even though 
you know not Heaven, might it not be more desirable than death? 

You have been as selective in your questioning as in your percep¬ 
tion. 
An open mind is more honest than this. 
T(493) -320 497 

T 12 D 4. 
The ego has a very strange notion of time, and it is with this 
notion that the questioning might well begin. 
The ego invests heav¬ 
ily in the past, and in the end, believes that the past is the ONLY as¬ 
pect of time that is meaningful. 
You will remember that we said its 
emphasis on guilt enables it to ensure its continuity, by MAKING 
THE FUTURE LIKE THE PAST, and thus AVOIDING the present. 

By the notion of PAYING FOR the past in the future, the past be- 


4,6 Genesis 2:7 And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils 
the breath of life; and man became a living being. 


Genesis 3:19 By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since 
from it you were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will return. 


497 Oct. 
7, 1966 


1-442 


452 



Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


comes the DETERMINER of the future, making THEM continuous, 
WITHOUT an intervening present. 
For the ego uses the present 
ONLY as a brief transition TO the future, in which it brings the past 
TO the future, BY INTERPRETING THE PRESENT IN PAST 
TERMS. 


T 12 D 5. 
NOW has no meaning to the ego. 
The present merely re¬ 
minds it of PAST hurts, and it reacts to the present AS IF it were 
past. 
For the ego cannot tolerate RELEASE from the past, and 
though it is no more, the ego tries to preserve its IMAGE by re¬ 
sponding as if it were present. 
Thus, it dictates reactions to those 
you meet NOW from a PAST reference point, obscuring their PRE¬ 
SENT reality. 
In effect, if you FOLLOW its dictates, you will react to 
your brothers as though they were SOMEONE ELSE, and this will 
surely prevent you from perceiving them AS THEY ARE. 
And you 
will receive messages from them out of your OWN past because, by 
making it real in the present, you are forbidding yourself to LET IT 
GO. 
You thus DENY yourself the message of release that every 
brother offers you NOW. 


T 12 D 6. 
The shadowy figures from the past are precisely what you 
must ESCAPE. 
For they are not real, and have no hold over you, 
unless YOU bring them WITH you. 
They carry the spots of pain in 
your minds, directing you to attack in the present, in retaliation for a 
past that is no more. 
AND THIS DECISION IS ONE OF FUTURE 
PAIN. 
For unless you learn that PAST pain is delusional, you are 
choosing a future of delusions, and losing the endless opportunities 
which you COULD find for release in the present. 
For the ego 
would PRESERVE T(494) -321 your nightmares, and PREVENT you 
from awaking, and understanding that THEY are past. 


T 12 D 7. 
Would you RECOGNIZE a holy encounter, if you are 
merely perceiving it as a meeting with your OWN past? For you are 
meeting no one, and the SHARING of salvation, WHICH MAKES 
THE ENCOUNTER HOLY, is excluded from your sight. 
The Holy 
Spirit teaches that you always meet YOURSELF, and the encounter 
is holy because YOU are. 
The ego teaches that you always encounter 


453 


1-443 


Volume I Text 


your PAST, and because your dreams WERE not holy, the future 
CANNOT be, and the present is without meaning. 
It is evident that 
the Holy Spirit's perception of time is the exact opposite of the ego's. 

And the reason is equally clear, for they perceive the GOAL of time 
as diametrically opposed. 


T 12 D 8. 
The Holy Spirit interprets time's PURPOSE as rendering the 
need for it UNNECESSARY. 
Thus does He regard the function of 
time as temporary, serving only His teaching function, which is 
temporary by definition. 
HIS emphasis is therefore on the ONLY 
aspect of time which CAN extend to the infinite. 
For NOW is the 
closest approximation of eternity that this world offers. 
And it is in 
the REALITY of now, without past OR future, that the beginning of 
the appreciation of eternity lies. 
For only now is HERE, and IT pre¬ 
sents the opportunities for the holy encounters, in which salvation 
can be found. 


T 12 D 9. 
The ego, on the other hand, regards the function of time as 
one of extending itself IN PLACE of eternity. 
For, like the Holy 
Spirit, the ego interprets the goal of time as its own. 
The continuity 
of past and future, UNDER ITS DIRECTION, is the only purpose it 
perceives in time, and it closes over the present, so that no gap in the 
EGO's continuity can occur. 
ITS continuity, then, would KEEP you 
in time, while the Holy Spirit would release you FROM it. 
And it is 
HIS interpretation of the means of salvation that you must learn to 
accept, if you would share His goal of salvation FOR you. 
T(495) -322 

T 12 D 10. 
You, too, will interpret the function of time as you interpret 
yours. 
If you accept your function in the world of time AS HEAL¬ 
ING, you will emphasize ONLY the aspect of time in which healing 
can occur. 
For healing CANNOT be accomplished in the past, and 
MUST be accomplished in the present to RELEASE the future. 
THIS 
interpretation ties the future to the present, and EXTENDS THE 
PRESENT, rather than the past. 
But if you interpret your function as 
DESTRUCTION, you will lose sight of the present, and hold on to 


1-444 


454 


Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


the past TO ENSURE A DESTRUCTIVE FUTURE. 
And time WILL 
be as you interpret it, for OF ITSELF it IS nothing. 
T(496) - 323 - 498 

T 12 E. 
The Two Emotions (Notes 1099 8:203) 

T 12 E 1 . 
We have said that you have but two emotions, love and fear. 

One is changeless but continually exchanged, being offered BY the 
eternal TO the eternal. 
In this exchange it is extended, for it IN¬ 
CREASES as it is given. 
The other has many forms, for the content of 
INDIVIDUAL illusions differs greatly. 
But they have one thing in 
common; they are all insane. 
They are made of sights which are 
NOT seen, and sounds which are NOT heard. 
They make up a PRI¬ 
VATE world which CANNOT be shared. 
For they are meaningful 
ONLY to their maker, and so they have no meaning at all. 
In this 
world their maker moves alone, for only HE perceives them. 


T 12 E 2. 
Each one peoples his world with figures from his INDIVID¬ 
UAL past, and it is because of this that private worlds DO differ. 
But 
the figures that he sees were NEVER real, for they are made up 
ONLY of his REACTIONS to his brothers, and do NOT include their 
reactions to HIM. 
Therefore he does not see that he made them, and 
that they ARE NOT WHOLE. 
For these figures HAVE NO WIT¬ 
NESSES, being perceived in one SEPARATE mind only. 


T 12 E 3. 
It is THROUGH these strange and shadowy figures that the 
insane relate to their insane world. 
For they SEE only those who re¬ 
mind them of these images, and it is to THEM that they relate. 
Thus 
do they communicate with those who ARE NOT THERE, and it is 
THEY who answer them. 
And no-one hears their answer save him 
who called upon them, and he ALONE believes they answered him. 

Projection MAKES perception, and you CANNOT see beyond it. 

Again and again have men attacked each other, because they saw IN 
THEM a shadow figure in their private world. 


T 12 E 4. 
And thus it is that you MUST attack yourself first. 
For what 
you attack is NOT in others. 
Its ONLY reality is in your OWN mind. 



498 Oct. 
10, 1966 


455 


1-445 



Volume I Text 


and by attacking T(497) - 324 - others, you are literally attacking 
WHAT IS NOT THERE. 
The delusional can be very destructive, for 
they do not recognize they have condemned THEMSELVES. 
They 
do not wish to die, YET THEY WILL NOT LET CONDEMNATION 
GO. 
And so they SEPARATE into their private world, where every¬ 
thing is disordered, and where what is within, appears to be with¬ 
out. 
Yet what IS within they do NOT see, for the REALITY of their 
brothers they CANNOT see. 


T 12 E 5. 
You have but two emotions, yet in your private world, you 
react to each of them AS THOUGH IT WERE THE OTHER. 
For love 
cannot abide in a world apart, where, when it comes, it is not recog¬ 
nized. 
If you see your own hatred AS your brother, you are not see¬ 
ing HIM. 
Everyone draws nigh unto what he loves, and recoils from 
what he fears. 
And you react with fear to love, and draw AWAY 
from it. 
But fear ATTRACTS you, and believing it is love, you call it 
to yourself. 
Your private world is filled with the figures of fear you 
have invited into it. 
And all the love your brothers offer you, YOU 
DO NOT SEE. 


T 12 E 6. 
As you look with open eyes upon your world, it MUST oc¬ 
cur to you that you have withdrawn into insanity. 
For you see what 
is not there, and hear what is soundless. 
Your behavioral MANI¬ 
FESTATIONS of emotions are the OPPOSITE of what the emotions 
ARE. 
You communicate with no-one, and you are as isolated from 
reality, as if you were ALONE in all the universe. 
In your madness, 
you OVERLOOK REALITY COMPLETELY, and you see ONLY 
YOUR SPLIT MIND everywhere you look. 
God calls you and you 
do not hear, for you are preoccupied with your own voice. 
And the 
vision of Christ is not in your sight, for you look upon yourself 
ALONE. 


T 12 E 7. 
Little children, would you offer THIS to your Father? For if 
you offer it to yourself, you ARE offering it to Him. 
And He will 
NOT return it, for it is unworthy of you BECAUSE it is unworthy of 
Him. 
But He WOULD release you T(498) - 325 - from it, and set you 
free. 
His sane answer tells you that what you have offered YOUR- 


1-446 


456 


Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


SELF is NOT true, but HIS offering TO you has never changed. 
You 
who know not what you do, CAN learn what insanity IS, and look 
beyond it. 
It is GIVEN you to learn how to DENY insanity, and 
come forth from your private world in peace. 


T 12 E 8. 
And you will see all that you denied in your brothers, BE¬ 
CAUSE you denied it in yourself. 
For you will love them, and by 
drawing nigh unto them, you will draw them to YOURSELF, per¬ 
ceiving them as witnesses to your reality, which you share with 
GOD. 
For I am WITH them, as I am with YOU. 
And we will draw 
them from their private world, for as we are united, so would we 
unite with them. 
The Father welcomes all of us in gladness, and 
gladness is what WE would offer Him. 
For every Son of God is 
given you, to whom God gave HIMSELF. 
And it is God Whom you 
must offer them, to recognize His gift to YOU. 
499 
T 12 E 9. 
Vision depends on light, and you CANNOT see in darkness. 

Yet in the darkness, in the private world of sleep, you SEE in 
dreams, although your eyes are closed. 
And it is here that WHAT 
you see YOU MADE. 
But let the DARKNESS go, and ALL you made 
YOU WILL NO LONGER SEE, for sight of IT depends upon DENY¬ 
ING vision. 
But from denying vision, IT DOES NOT FOLLOW 
THAT YOU CANNOT SEE. 
Yet this is what denial DOES, for BY it 
you ACCEPT insanity, believing you can make a private world, 
AND RULE YOUR OWN PERCEPTION. 
But FOR this, light MUST 
be excluded. 
Dreams disappear when light has come, AND YOU 
CAN SEE. 


T 12 E 10. 
Do not seek vision through YOUR eyes. 
For you MADE 
your way of seeing, that you might see in darkness, and in this you 


199 There is a grammar problem here: arguably it should be “God to Whom.” The Notes doesn’t have a 
“to” but then the Notes often leaves out tiny fragments. 
The sentence is somewhat unclear the way it 
stands. 
Are we being told to offer God to Them or offer Them to God? The word “to” is added because 
the grammar demands it. 
However, in no other version is this change made, including the Notes. 
There 
are two possible ways to read this: Either it is God to Whom you must offer them (His Sons which He 
has just given you) or it is God Who you must offer TO them. 
Due to the use of “whom” instead of 
“who” here, we feel the word “to” was intended before “Whom” and that “them”, who are God’s Sons 
just given me, are to be given back to God. 
Otherwise, the error is using “Whom” where “Who” is 
proper. 



457 


1-447 




Volume I Text 


ARE deceived. 
BEYOND this darkness, and yet still WITHIN you, is 
the vision of Christ, Who looks on all in light. 
YOUR vision comes 
from fear, as His from Love. 
And He sees FOR you, as your witness 
to the real world. 
He is the Holy Spirit's T(499) - 326 - MANIFESTA¬ 
TION, looking always on the real world, and calling forth its wit¬ 
nesses, and drawing them unto YOU. 
For He loves what He sees 
within you, and He would EXTEND it. 
And He will not return unto 
the Father, until He has extended your perception even unto Him. 

And there perception is no more, for He has RETURNED you to the 
Father WITH Him. 
500 

T 12 E 11. 
You have but two emotions, and one you made and one 
was GIVEN you. 
Each is a WAY OF SEEING, and different worlds 
arise from their different visions. 
See through the vision that is 
GIVEN you, for through Christ's vision He beholds Himself. 
And 
seeing what He is. 
He knows His Father. 
Beyond your darkest 
dreams. 
He sees God's guiltless Son within you, shining in perfect 
radiance, which is undimmed by your dreams. 
And this YOU will 
see, as you look with Him. 
For His vision is His gift of love to you, 
given Him of the Father FOR you. 


T 12 E 12. 
The Holy Spirit is the light in which Christ stands revealed. 

And all who would behold Him can see Him, for they have ASKED 
for light. 
Nor will they see Him ALONE, for He is no more alone 
than THEY are. 
Because they SAW the Son, they have risen IN Him 
to the Father. 
501 And all this will they understand, because they 
looked within, and saw, beyond the darkness, the Christ in them, 
and RECOGNIZED Him. 
In the sanity of His vision, they looked 
upon themselves with love, seeing themselves as the Holy Spirit 


500 John 14:12 “Most assuredly, I say to you, he who believes in Me, the works that I do he will do 
also; and greater works than these he will do, because I go to My Father.” 

John 14:28 “You have heard Me say to you, 'I am going away and coming back to you.' If you loved 
Me, you would rejoice because I said, 'I am going to the Father,' for My Father is greater than I.” 

501 Colossians 2:12 Buried with Him in baptism, in which you also were raised with Him through faith 
in the working of God, who raised Him from the dead. 


Colossians 3:1 If then you were raised with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ is, 
sitting at the right hand of God. 



1-448 


458 



Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


sees them. 
And WITH this vision of the truth in THEM, came all the 
beauty of the world to shine upon them. 
T(500) -327 502 

T 12 F. 
Finding the Present (Notes 1110 8:214) 

T 12 F l. 
To perceive truly is to be aware of ALL reality, through the 
awareness of your own. 
But for this, NO illusions can rise to meet 
your sight, for ALL reality leaves no room for ANY error. 
This 
means that you perceive a brother only AS YOU SEE HIM NOW. 


His past has NO reality in the present, and you CANNOT see it. 

Your past reactions TO him are also NOT THERE, and if it is to 
these that you react NOW, you see but an image of him that you 
made and cherish INSTEAD of him. 
In your questioning of delu¬ 
sions, ask yourself if it is REALLY sane to perceive WHAT WAS 
NOW. 
If you remember the PAST as you look upon him, you will be 
unable to perceive the reality that is NOW. 


T 12 F 2. 
You consider it "natural" to use your PAST experience as the 
reference point from which to JUDGE the present. 
Yet this is UN- 
natural, because it is delusional. 
When you have learned to look 
upon everyone with NO REFERENCE AT ALL to the past, either his 
OR yours as you perceived it, you will be able to learn FROM 
WHAT YOU SEE NOW. 
For the past can cast no shadow to darken 
the present, UNLESS YOU ARE AFRAID OF LIGHT. 
And ONLY if 
you are, would you choose to bring this darkness WITH you, and by 
holding it in your minds, see it as a dark cloud that shrouds your 
brothers, and conceals their reality from your sight. 


T 12 F 3. 
THIS DARKNESS IS IN YOU. 
The Christ revealed to you 
NOW has no past, for He is changeless. 
AND IN HIS CHANGE¬ 
LESSNESS LIES YOUR RELEASE. 
For if He is as He was created, 
there IS no guilt in Him. 
No cloud of guilt has risen to obscure Him, 
and He stands revealed in everyone you meet, because you see Him 
through HIMSELF. 
T(50l) -328 To be born again 503 is to let the PAST 


502 October 16, 1966 

503 John 3:3 Jesus answered and said to him, "Most assuredly, I say to you, unless one is bom again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God.” 

John 3:7 Do not marvel that I said to you, “You must be bom again.” 


459 


1-449 



Volume I Text 


go, and LOOK WITHOUT CONDEMNATION UPON THE PRE¬ 
SENT. 
For the cloud which obscures God's Son to you IS the past, 
and if you would have it past AND GONE, you must NOT SEE IT 
NOW. 
And if you see it now in your delusions, it has NOT gone 
from you, although it is not there. 


T 12 F 4. 
Time can release as well as imprison, depending on whose 
interpretation of it you use. 
Past, present, and future are not con¬ 
tinuous, UNLESS YOU FORCE CONTINUITY ON THEM. 
You can 
PERCEIVE them as continuous, and make them so FOR YOU. 
But 
do not be deceived, and then believe that this is how it IS, for to be¬ 
lieve that reality is what you would HAVE it be, according to YOUR 
use for it, IS delusional. 
You would DESTROY time's continuity by 
breaking it into past, present, and future, FOR YOUR OWN PUR¬ 
POSES. 
You would anticipate the future on the basis of your PAST 
experience and plan for it accordingly. 
And by so doing, you are 
ALIGNING past and future, and not allowing the miracles, which 
could intervene BETWEEN them, to free you to be born again. 
504 
T 12 F 5. 
The miracle enables you to see your brother WITHOUT his 
past, and so perceive him as born again. 
505 His errors ARE all past, 
and by perceiving him WITHOUT them, you are RELEASING him. 

And since his past is yours, you SHARE in this release. 
Let no dark 
cloud out of YOUR past obscure him from you, for truth lies ONLY 
in the present, and you WILL find it if you seek it there. 
You have 
looked for it where it is NOT, and therefore have not found it. 


Learn, then, to seek it where it IS, and it WILL dawn on eyes that 
see. 
Your past was made in anger, and if you use it to ATTACK the 
present you will NOT SEE the freedom that the present holds. 
T(502) 
-329 Judgment and condemnation are BEHIND you, and unless you 
bring them WITH you, you WILL see that you are free of them. 


T 12 F 6. 
Look lovingly upon the present, for it holds the ONLY 
things that are forever true. 
All healing lies within it, because ITS 


see previous footnotes re: “bom again” 
see previous footnotes re: “bom again” 


1-450 


460 



Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


continuity is real. 
It extends to ALL aspects of consciousness AT 
THE SAME TIME, and thus enables them to REACH EACH 
OTHER. 
The present is before time WAS, and WILL BE when time 
is no more. 
In it is everything that is eternal, and they ARE one. 

THEIR continuity is timeless, and their communication is unbroken, 
for they are NOT SEPARATED by the past. 
Only the past CAN 
separate, and IT is nowhere. 


T 12 F 7. 
The present offers you your brothers in the light that would 
unite you WITH them, and free YOU from the past. 
Would you, 
then, hold the past AGAINST them? For if you do, you are choosing 
to remain in the darkness THAT IS NOT THERE, and refusing to 
accept the light that is offered you. 
For the light of perfect vision is 
freely given, as it is freely received, and can be accepted only 
WITHOUT LIMIT. 
In this one, still dimension of time, which does 
not change, and where there is no sight of what you were, you look 
at Christ, and call His witnesses to shine on you, BECAUSE YOU 
CALLED THEM FORTH. 
And THEY will not deny the truth in you, 
because you looked for it in them, and FOUND it there. 


T 12 F 8. 
Now is the time for salvation, for NOW is the release from 
time. 
Reach out to all your brothers, and touch them with the touch 
of Christ. 
In timeless union WITH them is YOUR continuity, unbro¬ 
ken because it is wholly shared. 
God's guiltless Son is ONLY light. 

There is no darkness in him ANYWHERE, for he is whole. 
506 T(503) - 
330 Call all your brothers to witness to his wholeness, as I am calling 
you to join with me. 
Every voice has a part in the song of redemp¬ 
tion, the hymn of gladness and thanksgiving for the light, to the 
Creator of Light. 
The holy light that shines forth from God's Son is 
the witness that his light is of his Father. 


T 12 F 9. 
Shine on your brothers in remembrance of your Creator, and 
you WILL remember Him, as you call forth the witnesses to His 


506 1 John 1:5 This is the message which we have heard from Him and declare to you, that God is light 
and in Him is no darkness at all. 


1 John 2:8 Again, a new commandment I write to you, which thing is true in Him and in you, because 
the darkness is passing away, and the true light is already shining. 



461 


1-451 



Volume I Text 


creation. 
Those whom you heal bear witness to YOUR healing, for in 
THEIR wholeness you will see your own. 
And as your hymns of 
praise and gladness rise to your Creator, He will return your thanks, 
in His clear answer to your call. 
For it can never be that His Son 
called upon Him, and remained unanswered. 
His call to you is but 
your call to Him. 
And in Him you are answered by His peace. 


T 12 F 10. 
Children of Light, you know not that the Light is in you. 

And you will find it through its witnesses. 
For having given light to 
them, THEY WILL RETURN IT. 
Everyone you see IN light brings 
YOUR light closer to your OWN awareness. 
Love always leads to 
love. 
The sick, who ASK for love, are grateful for it, and in their joy, 
they shine with holy thanks. 
And this they offer you, who GAVE 
them joy. 
They are your guides to joy, for having received it OF you, 
they would keep it. 
You have established them as guides to peace, 
for you have made it manifest in them. 
And SEEING it, its beauty 
calls you home. 


T 12 F 11. 
There is a light which this world cannot give. 
Yet YOU can 
give it, as it was given YOU. 
And AS you give it, it shines forth to 
call you FROM the world, and follow it. 
For this light T(504) - 331 - 
will attract you as nothing in this world can do. 
And you will lay 
aside the world and find another. 
This other world is bright with 
love WHICH YOU HAVE GIVEN IT. 
And here will everything re¬ 
mind you of your Father and his holy Son. 
Light is unlimited, and 
spreads across this world in quiet joy. 
All those you brought WITH 
you will shine on you, and you will shine on them in gratitude, be¬ 
cause they brought you here. 
Your light will join with theirs, in 
power so compelling, that it will draw the others out of darkness as 
you look on them. 


T 12 F12. 
Awaking unto Christ is following the laws of love OF 
YOUR FREE WILL, and out of quiet recognition of the truth in 
them. 
The attraction of light must draw you willingly, and willing¬ 
ness is signified by GIVING. 
Those who accept love OF you, become 
your willing witnesses to the love you gave them, and it is THEY 
who hold it out to YOU. 
In sleep you are alone, and your awareness 


1-452 


462 


Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


is narrowed to yourself. 
And that is why the nightmares come. 
You 
dream of isolation, BECAUSE your eyes are closed. 
You do not SEE 
your brothers, and, in the darkness, you cannot look upon the light 
you GAVE to them. 


T 12 F13. 
And yet the laws of love are not suspended because you 
sleep. 
And you have followed them through all your nightmares, 
and have been faithful in your giving, for you were NOT alone. 


Even in sleep has Christ protected you, ensuring the real world FOR 
you when you wake. 
In YOUR name He has given FOR you, and 
given YOU the gifts He gave. 
God's Son is still as loving as his Fa¬ 
ther. 
Continuous WITH his Father, he has no past APART from 
Him. 
So he has never ceased to be his Father's witness, AND HIS 
OWN. 
Although he slept, CHRIST'S VISION DID NOT LEAVE 
HIM. 
And so it is that he can call unto himself the witnesses that 
teach him that he never slept. 
T(505) -332 507 

T 12 G. 
Attainment of the Real World (Notes 1120 8:224) 

T 12 G l. 
Sit quietly and look upon the world you see, and tell your¬ 
self, "The real world is not like this. 
It has no buildings, and there 
are no streets where people walk alone and separately. 
There are no 
stores where people buy an endless list of things they do not need. 
It 
is not lit with artificial light, and night comes not upon it. 
There is 
no day that brightens and grows dim. 
There is no loss. 
Nothing is 
there but shines, and shines forever." This world you see MUST BE 
DENIED, for sight of it is costing you a different kind of vision. 


YOU CANNOT SEE BOTH WORLDS, for each of them involves a 
different kind of seeing, and depends on what you cherish. 
The 
sight of one is possible because you have denied the other. 


T 12 G 2. 
Both are not true, yet either one will seem as real to you as 
the amount to which you hold it dear. 
And yet their power is NOT 
the same, because their real attraction to you is unequal. 
You do not 
really want the world you see, for it has disappointed you since time 
began. 
The homes you built have never sheltered you. 
The roads 


507 October 19, 1966 


463 


1-453 



Volume I Text 


you made have led you nowhere, and no city that you built has 
withstood the crumbling assault of time. 
Nothing you made but has 
the mark of death 508 upon it. 
Hold it not dear, for it is old and tired, 
and ready to return to dust, even as you made it. 
509 

T 12 G 3. 
This aching world has not the power to touch the living 
world at all. 
You could not give it that, and so, although you turn in 
sadness from it, you cannot find in it the road that leads AWAY 
from it into another world. 
Yet the REAL world HAS the power to 
touch you even here BECAUSE YOU LOVE IT. 
And what you call 
with love WILL come to you. 
LOVE ALWAYS ANSWERS, being 
unable to deny a call for help, or not to hear the cries of pain that 
rise to it, from every part of this strange world you made, but do not 
want. 
The only effort you need make, to give this world away in 
glad exchange for what you did NOT make is willingness to learn 
THE ONE YOU MADE IS FALSE. 
T(506) -333 

T 12 G 4. 
You HAVE been wrong about the world, because you have 
misjudged YOURSELF. 
From such a twisted reference point, what 
COULD you see? All vision starts WITH THE PERCEIVER, who 
judges what is true and what is false. 
And what he judges false, HE 
DOES NOT SEE. 
You who would judge reality CANNOT see it, for 
whenever judgment enters, reality has slipped away. 
The out of 
mind is out of sight, because what is denied is THERE, but is not 
recognized. 
Christ is still there, although you know Him not. 
His 
Being does NOT depend upon your recognition. 
He lives within 
you in the quiet present, and waits for you to leave the past behind, 
and enter into the world He holds out to you in love. 


T 12 G 5. 
No-one in this distracted world but has not seen some 
glimpses of the other world about him. 
But while he still lays value 
on his own, he will DENY the vision of the other world, maintaining 
that he loves WHAT HE LOVES NOT, and following not the road 


508 Exodus 19:12 Mark a boundary around the mountain that the people must not cross, and tell them 
not to go up the mountain or even get near it. 
If any of you set foot on it, you are to be put to death; 

>09 Genesis 3:19 By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since 
from it you were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will return.” 


1-454 


464 



Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


that love points out. 
Love leads so gladly! And as you follow Him, 
YOU will rejoice that you have found His company, and learned of 
Him the joyful journey home. 
You wait but for YOURSELF. 
To give 
this sad world over, and exchange your errors for the peace of God, 
is but YOUR will. 
And Christ will ALWAYS offer you the Will of 
God, in recognition that you share it WITH Him. 


T 12 G 6. 
It is God's Will that nothing touch His Son except Himself, 
and nothing else comes nigh unto him. 
He is as safe from pain as 
God Himself, Who watches over him in everything. 
The world 
about him shines with love, because God placed him in Himself 
where pain is not, and love surrounds him without end or flaw. 
Dis¬ 
turbance of his peace can never be. 
In perfect sanity he looks on 
love, for it is all about him, and within him. 
He MUST deny the 
world of pain, the instant he perceives the arms of love around him. 

And from this point of safety, he looks quietly about him, and rec¬ 
ognizes that the world is one with him. 
T(507) -334 
T 12 G 7. 
The peace of God passeth 510 your understanding ONLY in 
the past. 
Yet here it IS, and you CAN understand it NOW. 
God 
loves His Son forever, and His Son RETURNS his Father's love for¬ 
ever. 
The real world is the way that leads you to remembrance of 
this one thing that is wholly true, and wholly YOURS. 
For all else 
you have LENT yourself in time, and it WILL fade. 
But this one 
thing is ALWAYS yours, being the gift of God unto His Son. 
Your 
ONE reality was GIVEN you, and BY it God created you as one with 
Him. 


T 12 G 8. 
You will first DREAM of peace, and THEN awaken to it. 


Your first exchange of what you made for what, you want is the ex¬ 
change of nightmares for the happy dreams of love. 
In these lie your 
true perceptions, for the Holy Spirit corrects the world of dreams, 
where ALL perception is. 
Knowledge needs NO correction. 
Yet the 
dreams of love lead UNTO knowledge. 
In them you see nothing 


510 Philippians 4:6-7 In nothing be anxious; but in everything by prayer and supplication with 
thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God. 
And the peace of God, which passeth all 
understanding, shall guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus. 



465 


1-455 



Volume I Text 


fearful, and BECAUSE of this they are the welcome that you OFFER 
knowledge. 
Love waits on welcome, NOT on time, and the real 
world is but your welcome of what always was. 
Therefore the call of 
joy is in it, and your glad response is your awakening to what you 
have NOT lost. 
Praise, then, the Father for the perfect sanity of His 
most holy Son. 


T 12 G 9. 
Your Father knoweth 511 that you have need of nothing. 
In 
Heaven this is so, for what could you need in eternity? In YOUR 
world you DO need things, because it is a world of scarcity in which 
you find yourself BECAUSE you are lacking. 
But CAN you find 
yourself in such a world? Without the Holy Spirit, the answer 
would be no. 
But BECAUSE of Him, the answer is a joyous YES. 
As 
mediator between the two worlds. 
He knows what you have need 
of, and WHICH WILL NOT HURT YOU. 
Ownership is a dangerous 
concept, if it is left to you. 
The ego wants to HAVE things for salva¬ 
tion, for possession is its law. 
Possession for its OWN sake is the 
ego's fundamental creed, a basic cornerstone in the churches that it 
builds unto itself. 
And at ITS altar, it demands you lay ALL of the 
things it bids you get, leaving you no joy in them. 
T(508) - 335 - 
T 12 G 10. 
EVERYTHING that the ego tells you that you need will 
hurt you. 
For, although it urges you again and again to GET, it 
LEAVES you nothing, for what you get it will DEMAND of you. 

And even from the very hands that grasped it, it will be wrenched 
and hurled into the dust. 
For where the ego sees salvation IT SEES 
SEPARATION, and so you lose whatever you have gotten in its 
name. 
Therefore, ask not of yourselves what you need, FOR YOU 
KNOW NOT, and your advice unto yourself WILL hurt you. 
For 
what YOU think you need will merely serve to tighten up your 
world AGAINST the light, and render you unwilling to question the 
value that this world can REALLY hold for you. 



511 Luke 12:30 “For all these things do the nations of the world seek after: but your Father knoweth that 
ye have need of these things.” also Matthew 6:8 and 6:32 


1-456 


466 



Chapter 12 - The Problem of Guilt 


T 12 G ll. 
Only the Holy Spirit KNOWS what you need. 
For HE will 
give you all things that do NOT block the way to light. 
And what 
else COULD you need? In time. 
He gives you all the things that you 
need have, and will renew them as long as you have need of them. 

He will take nothing FROM you, as long as you have ANY need of 
it. 
And yet He knows that EVERYTHING you need is temporary, 
and need but last until you step aside from ALL your needs, and 
learn that all of them HAVE BEEN fulfilled. 
Therefore, He has no 
investment in the things that He supplies, except to make certain 
that you will NOT use them on behalf of lingering in time. 
He 
knows that you are not at home there, and He wills no delay to wait 
upon your joyous homecoming. 


T 12 G12. 
Leave, then, your needs to Him. 
He will supply 512 them, 
with no emphasis at all upon them. 
What comes to you of Him 
comes safely, for He will ensure it never can become a dark spot, 
hidden in your mind, and kept to hurt you. 
Under His guidance, 
you will travel light and journey lightly, for His sight is ever on the 
journey's end, which is His goal. 
God's Son is not a traveler through 
OUTER worlds. 
However holy his perception may become, no 
world OUTSIDE himself holds his inheritance. 
Within HIMSELF he 
HAS no needs, for light needs nothing but to shine in peace. 
And 
from ITSELF, to let the rays extend in quiet to infinity. 


T 12 G13. 
Whenever you are tempted to undertake a foolish journey 
that would lead AWAY from light, remember what you REALLY 
want, and say, "The Holy Spirit leads T(509) - 336 - me unto Christ, 
and where else would I go? What need have I but to awake in 
Him?" Then follow Him in joy, with faith that He will lead you 
safely through all the dangers to your peace of mind that this world 
sets before you. 
Kneel not before the altars to sacrifice, and seek not 
what you will surely lose. 
Content yourselves with what you will as 
surely KEEP, and be not restless, for you undertake a quiet journey 
to the peace of God, where He would have you be in quietness. 



512 Philippians 4:19 And my God shall supply every need of yours according to his riches in glory in 
Christ Jesus. 



467 


1-457 



Volume I Text 


T 12 G14. 
In me, you have ALREADY overcome EVERY temptation 
that would hold you back. 
We walk together on the way to quiet¬ 
ness that is the gift of God. 
Hold me dear, for what EXCEPT your 
brothers CAN you need? We will restore to you the peace of mind 
that we MUST find together. 
The Holy Spirit will teach you to 
awaken unto us, and to yourself. 
THIS is the only REAL need to be 
fulfilled in time. 
Salvation FROM the world lies ONLY here. 
My 
peace I GIVE you. 
513 TAKE it of me, in glad exchange for all the 
world has offered but to TAKE AWAY. 
And we will spread it, like a 
veil of light, across the world's sad face, in which we hide our 
brothers FROM the world, and it from them. 


T 12 G 15. 
We cannot sing redemption's hymn alone. 
My task is not 
completed 'til I have lifted every voice with mine. 
And yet it is NOT 
mine, for as it is my gift to you, so was it the Father's gift to me, 
given me through His Spirit. 
The sound of it will banish sorrow 
from the mind of God's most holy Son, where it cannot abide. 
Heal¬ 
ing in time IS needed, for joy cannot establish its eternal reign where 
sorrow dwells. 
You dwell not here, but in eternity. 
You travel but in 
dreams, while safe at home. 
Give thanks to every part of you that 
you have taught how to REMEMBER you. 
Thus does the Son of God 
give thanks unto his Father for his purity. 
T(510) -337 


513 John 14:27 “Peace I leave with you, My peace I give to you; not as the world gives do I give to you. 

Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.” 


1-458 


468 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 

T 13 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1132 8:236) 

T 13 A l. 
All therapy is release from the past. 
And that is why the 
Holy Spirit IS the only therapist. 
HE TEACHES THAT THE PAST 
DOES NOT EXIST, a fact which belongs to the sphere of knowledge, 
and which therefore NO-ONE IN THE WORLD KNOWS. 
It would 
indeed be impossible to BE in the world with this knowledge. 
For 
the mind that knows this unequivocally, knows also that it dwells in 
eternity, and utilizes no perception at all. 
It therefore does not con¬ 
sider WHERE it is, because the concept "where" does not mean any¬ 
thing to it. 
It knows that it is EVERYWHERE, just as it has EVERY¬ 
THING and FOREVER. 


T 13 A 2. 
The very real difference between perception and knowledge 
becomes quite apparent, if you consider this: there is NOTHING 
partial about knowledge. 
Every aspect is whole, and therefore NO 
ASPECT IS SEPARATE. 
YOU are an aspect of knowledge, being in 
the Mind of God, Who KNOWS you. 
All knowledge MUST be 
yours, for in you IS all knowledge. 
Perception, at its loftiest, is 
NEVER complete. 
Even the perception of the Holy Spirit, as perfect 
as perception CAN be, is without meaning in Heaven. 
Perception 
can reach EVERYWHERE under His guidance, for the vision of 
Christ beholds EVERYTHING in light. 
But no perception, however 
holy, will last FOREVER. 


T 13 B. 
The Role of Healing (Notes 1133 8:237) 

T 13 B l. 
Perfect perception, then, has many elements IN COMMON 
with knowledge, making transfer TO it possible. 
Yet the last step 
must be taken by God, because the last step in your redemption, 
which SEEMS to be in the future, WAS accomplished by God in 
your creation. 
The separation has NOT interrupted it. 
Creation can¬ 
not BE interrupted. 
The separation is merely a faulty formulation of 
reality, WITH NO EFFECT AT ALL. 
The miracle, without a function 
in Heaven, IS needful here. 
ASPECTS of reality can still be seen, and 


469 


1-459 


Volume I Text 


they will replace aspects of UNREALITY. 
Aspects of reality can be 
seen IN EVERYTHING and EVERYWHERE. 
Yet only God can 
gather them together by crowning them AS ONE with the final gift 
of eternity. 
T(5ll) -338 

T 13 B 2. 
Apart from the Father and the Son, the Holy Spirit has no 
function. 
He is not separate from either, being in the mind of both, 
and knowing that Mind is one. 
He is a thought of God, and God has 
GIVEN Him to you, because He has NO thoughts He does not 
share. 
His message speaks of timelessness in time, and that is why 
Christ's vision looks on everything with love. 
Yet even Christ's vi¬ 
sion is not His reality. 
The golden ASPECTS of reality, which spring 
to light under His loving gaze, are partial glimpses of the Heaven 
that lies beyond them. 


T 13 B 3. 
This is the miracle of creation; THAT IT IS ONE FOREVER. 

Every miracle you offer to the Son of God, is but the true perception 
of one ASPECT of the whole. 
Though every aspect IS the whole, you 
cannot KNOW this, until you SEE that every aspect IS THE SAME, 
perceived in the SAME light; and THEREFORE one. 
Everyone seen 
WITHOUT the past thus brings you nearer to the end of time, by 
bringing healed and healing sight into the darkness, and ENA¬ 
BLING THE WORLD TO SEE. 
For light must come into the dark¬ 
ened world, to make Christ's vision possible even here. 
Help Him to 
give His gift of light to all who think they wander in the darkness, 
and let Him gather them into His quiet sight that makes them one. 


T 13 B 4. 
They are all the same; all beautiful, and equal in their holi¬ 
ness. 
And He will offer them unto His Father, as they were offered 
unto Him. 
There is ONE miracle, as there is ONE reality. 
And every 
miracle you do contains them all, as every aspect of reality you see 
blends quietly into the one reality of God. 
The only miracle that ever 
was, is God's most holy Son, created in the One Reality that is his 
Father. 
Christ's vision is His gift to you. 
His Being is His Father's 
gift to Him. 
T(512) - 339 - 

T 13 B 5. 
Be you content with healing, for Christ's gift you CAN be¬ 
stow, and your Father's gift you CANNOT lose. 
Offer Christ's gift to 


1-460 


470 


Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


everyone and everywhere. 
For miracles, offered the Son of God 
through the Holy Spirit, attune YOU to reality. 
The Holy Spirit 
knows your part in the redemption, and who are seeking you, and 
where to find them. 
Knowledge is far beyond your individual con¬ 
cern. 
You who are part of it, and all of it, need only realize that it is 
of the Father, NOT of you. 
Your role in the redemption LEADS you 
to it, by re-establishing its oneness in your minds. 


T 13 B 6. 
When you have seen your brothers as yourself, you will be 
RELEASED to knowledge, having learned to FREE yourself, of Him 
who knows of freedom. 
Unite with me, under the holy banner of 
His teaching, and, as we grow in strength, the power of God's Son 
will move in us, and we will leave no-one untouched and no-one 
left alone. 
And suddenly, time will be over, and we will all unite in 
the Eternity of God the Father. 
The holy light you saw OUTSIDE 
yourself, in every miracle you offered to your brothers, will be RE¬ 
TURNED to you. 
And, KNOWING that the light is IN you, YOUR 
creations will be there WITH you, as you are in your Father. 


T 13 B 7. 
As miracles in this world join you to your brothers, so do 
your creations establish your fatherhood in Heaven. 
YOU are the 
witnesses to the Fatherhood of God, and He has given you the 
power to create the witnesses to YOURS, which is as HIS. 
Deny a 
brother here, and you deny the witnesses to your fatherhood in 
Heaven. 
The miracle which God created is perfect, as are the mira¬ 
cles which YOU created in His Name. 
They need no healing, nor do 
you, when you know THEM. 


T 13 B 8. 
But in this world, your perfection is unwitnessed. 
God 
knows it, but YOU do not, and so you do not SHARE His witness 
TO it. 
Nor do you witness unto Him, for reality is witnessed to as 
one. 
God waits your witness to His Son, and to Himself. 
The mira¬ 
cles you do on earth are lifted up to Heaven, and to Him. 
They wit¬ 
ness to what you do not know, and, as they reach the gates of 


471 


1-461 


Volume I Text 


Heaven , 514 God will open them. 
For never would He leave His own 
beloved Son outside them, and beyond Himself. 
T(513) -340 

T 13 C. 
The Shadow of Guilt (Notes 1138 8:242) 

T 13 C 1 . 
Guilt remains the only thing that hides the Father, FOR 
GUILT IS THE ATTACK UPON HIS SON. 
The guilty ALWAYS 
condemn, and HAVING done so, they WILL condemn, linking the 
future to the past, as is the ego's law. 
Fidelity unto this law lets no 
light in, for it DEMANDS fidelity to darkness, and FORBIDS awak¬ 
ening. 
The ego's laws are strict, and breaches are severely punished. 

Therefore, give no obedience to its laws, for they ARE laws of pun¬ 
ishment. 
And those who follow them believe that THEY are guilty, 
and so they MUST condemn. 
Between the future and the past, the 
laws of God must intervene, if you would free yourselves. 
Atone¬ 
ment stands between them, like a lamp that shines so brightly, that 
the chain of darkness, in which you bound yourselves will disap¬ 
pear. 


T 13 C 2. 
Release from guilt is the ego's whole undoing. 
MAKE NO- 
ONE FEARFUL, for his guilt is yours, and, by obeying the ego's 
harsh commandments, you bring its condemnation on yourself, and 
you will not escape the punishment it offers those who obey it. 
The 
ego rewards fidelity to it with pain, for faith in it IS pain. 
And faith 
can be rewarded only in terms of the belief in which the faith was 
placed. 
Faith MAKES the power of belief, and WHERE it is invested, 
determines its reward . 
515 For faith is ALWAYS given what is treas¬ 
ured, and what is treasured IS returned to you. 


T 13 C 3. 
The world can give you ONLY what you gave it, for being 
nothing but your own projection, it HAS no meaning apart from 
what you found in it, and placed your faith in. 
Be faithful unto 
darkness, and you will NOT see, because your faith WILL be re- 


514 Genesis 28:17 And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none other than the 
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!” 

515 Matthew 6:21 “For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.” 

Hebrews 11:1 Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. 



1-462 


472 




Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


warded as you GAVE it. 
You WILL accept your treasure , 516 T(514) - 

341 and if you place your faith in the past, the future WILL be like it. 

Whate'er you hold as dear YOU THINK IS YOURS. 
The power of 
your VALUING will make it so. 


T 13 C 4. 
Atonement brings a re-evaluation of EVERYTHING you 
cherish, for it is the means by which the Holy Spirit can SEPARATE 
the false and true, which you have accepted into your minds 
WITHOUT DISTINCTION. 
Therefore, you cannot value one with¬ 
out the other, and guilt has become AS TRUE FOR YOU AS INNO¬ 
CENCE. 
You do NOT believe the Son of God is guiltless, because 
you see the past, and see HIM not. 
When you condemn a brother, 
you are saying, "I who WAS guilty choose to REMAIN so." You 
have denied HIS freedom, and by so doing, you have denied the 
witness unto YOURS. 
You could as easily have FREED him from the 
past, and lifted from his mind the cloud of guilt that binds him TO 
it. 
And in HIS freedom would have been your OWN. 


T 13 C 5. 
Lay not his guilt upon him, for HIS guilt lies in his secret 
that HE thinks that HE has done this unto YOU. 
Would you then 
teach him that he is RIGHT in his delusion? The idea that the guilt¬ 
less Son of God can attack himself, and MAKE him guilty, IS insane. 

In ANY form, in ANYONE, BELIEVE THIS NOT. 
For sin and con¬ 
demnation are the same, and the belief in one is faith in the other, 
calling for punishment INSTEAD of love. 
NOTHING can justify in¬ 
sanity, and to call for punishment UPON YOURSELF, MUST be in¬ 
sane. 


T 13 C 6. 
See no-one, then, as guilty, and you will affirm the truth of 
guiltlessness UNTO YOURSELF. 
In every condemnation that you 
offer the Son of God, lies the conviction of your OWN guilt. 
T(515) - 

342 -If you would have the Holy Spirit make YOU free of it, accept 
His offer of Atonement for ALL your brothers. 
For so you learn that 
IT IS TRUE FOR YOU. 
Remember always that it is impossible to 
condemn the Son of God IN PART. 
Those whom you see as guilty. 



516 Matthew 6:21 “For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.” 


473 


1-463 



Volume I Text 


become the witnesses to guilt IN YOU, and you WILL see it there, 
for it IS there, until it is undone. 
Guilt is ALWAYS in your OWN 
mind, WHICH HAS CONDEMNED ITSELF. 
Project it not, for while 
you do, it cannot BE undone. 
With everyone whom you release 
from guilt, great is the joy in Heaven , 517 where the witnesses to your 
fatherhood rejoice. 


T 13 C 7. 
GUILT MAKES YOU BLIND. 
For while you see one spot of 
guilt within you, YOU WILL NOT SEE THE LIGHT. 
And by project¬ 
ing it, the WORLD seems dark, and shrouded in your guilt. 
You 
throw a dark veil over it, and cannot see it, BECAUSE YOU CAN¬ 
NOT LOOK WITHIN. 
You are afraid of what you would see there, 
but it is NOT there. 
THE THING YOU FEAR IS GONE. 
If you 
would look within, you would see only the Atonement, shining in 
quiet and in peace, upon the altar to your Father. 
Do not be afraid to 
look within. 
The ego tells you all is black with guilt within you, and 
bids you NOT TO LOOK. 
Instead, it bids you look upon your broth¬ 
ers, AND SEE THE GUILT IN THEM. 


T 13 C 8. 
Yet this you cannot do, WITHOUT REMAINING BLIND. 


For those who see their brothers dark, and guilty in the dark in 
which they shroud them, are too afraid to look upon the light 
within. 
Within you is NOT what you believe is there, and what YOU 
put your faith in. 
Within you is the holy sign of perfect faith YOUR 
FATHER has in you. 
HE does not value you as you do. 
He knows 
Himself, and knows the truth IN YOU. 
He knows THERE IS NO 
DIFFERENCE, for He knows not of differences. 
Can YOU see guilt 
where God KNOWS there is perfect innocence? You can DENY His 
knowledge, but you CANNOT change it. 
Look, then, upon the light 
He placed within you, and learn that what you feared was there 
HAS BEEN replaced with love. 
T(516) - 343 - 


517 Luke 15:7 “I say to you that likewise there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents 
than over ninety-nine just persons who need no repentance.” 


1-464 


474 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


T 13 D. 
Release and Restoration (Notes 1144 8:248) 

T 13 D l. 
You are accustomed to the notion that the mind can see the 
source of pain where it is not. 
The doubtful service of displacement 
is to hide the REAL source of your guilt, and KEEP from your 
awareness the full perception THAT IT IS INSANE. 
Displacement 
ALWAYS is maintained by the illusion that the source, from which 
attention is diverted, MUST BE TRUE. 
And MUST BE FEARFUL, or 
you would not have displaced the guilt onto what you believed to 
be LESS fearful. 
You are therefore willing, with little opposition, to 
look upon all sorts of "sources" underneath awareness, provided 
that they are not the deeper source, to which they bear no real rela¬ 
tionship at all. 
Insane ideas HAVE no real relationships, for that is 
why they ARE insane. 


T 13 D 2. 
No real relationship can rest on guilt, or even hold one spot 
of it, to mar its purity. 
For all relationships which guilt has touched, 
are used but to avoid the person AND the guilt. 
What strange rela¬ 
tionships you have made for this strange purpose! And you forgot 
that real relationships are holy, and cannot be used by YOU at all. 

They are used ONLY by the Holy Spirit, and it is that that MAKES 
them pure. 
If you displace YOUR guilt upon them, the Holy Spirit 
cannot use them. 
For, by pre-empting FOR YOUR OWN ends what 
you should have given HIM, he cannot use them unto YOUR re¬ 
lease. 
No-one who would unite in ANY way, with ANYONE, for his 
OWN salvation will find it in that strange relationship. 
It is not 
shared, and so it is not real. 


T 13 D 3. 
In any union with a brother, in which you seek to lay YOUR 
guilt upon him, or share it WITH him, or perceive his own, YOU 
WILL FEEL GUILTY. 
Nor will you find satisfaction and peace with 
him, because your union with him IS NOT REAL. 
You will see guilt 
in that relationship, BECAUSE YOU PUT IT THERE. 
It is inevitable 
that those who suffer guilt WILL attempt to displace it, because they 
DO believe in it. 
Yet, though they suffer, they will not look within, 
AND LET IT GO. 
They cannot know they love, and cannot under¬ 
stand WHAT LOVING IS. 
Their main concern is to perceive the 


475 


1-465 


Volume I Text 


source of guilt T(517) -344 OUTSIDE themselves, BEYOND their own 
control. 


T 13 D 4. 
When you maintain that YOU are guilty, but the source LIES 
IN THE PAST, you are NOT looking inward. 
The past is NOT in 
you. 
Your weird associations to it HAVE no meaning in the present. 

Yet you let them stand BETWEEN you and your brothers, with 
whom you find no REAL relationships at all. 
Can you EXPECT to 
use your brothers as a means to solve the past, and still to see them 
as they really ARE? Salvation is not found by those who use their 
brothers to resolve problems WHICH ARE NOT THERE. 
You 
wanted not salvation in the past. 
Would you impose your idle 
wishes on the present, and hope to find salvation NOW? 

T 13 D 5. 
Determine, then, to be NOT as you were. 
Use no relation¬ 
ship to hold you to the past, but with each one, each day, be born 
again . 
518 A minute, even less, will be enough to free you from the 
past, and give your mind in peace over to the Atonement. 
When 
everyone is welcome to you as you would have YOURSELF be wel¬ 
come to your Father, you will see no guilt in you. 
For you will have 
ACCEPTED the Atonement, which shone within you all the while 
you dreamed of guilt, and would not look within and SEE it. 


T 13 D 6. 
As long as you believe that guilt is justified in ANY way, in 
ANYONE, WHATEVER he may do, you will not look within, where 
you would ALWAYS find Atonement. 
The end of guilt will never 
come as long as you believe THERE IS A REASON FOR IT. 
For you 
must learn that guilt is ALWAYS totally insane, and HAS no reason. 

The Holy Spirit seeks not to dispel REALITY. 
If GUILT were real, 
ATONEMENT would not be. 
The purpose of Atonement is to dispel 
illusions, NOT to establish them as real, and THEN forgive them. 

The Holy Spirit does not KEEP illusions in your mind to frighten 
you, and show them to you fearfully, to demonstrate what He has 
saved you FROM. 
T(518) - 345 - 


518 John 3:3 Jesus answered and said to him, “Most assuredly, I say to you, unless one is born again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God.” 

John 3:7 Do not marvel that I said to you, “You must be bom again.' 


1-466 


476 


PROOF 


COPY 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 

T 13 D 7. 
WHAT HE HAS SAVED YOU FROM IS GONE. 
Give NO 
reality to guilt, and see NO reason for it. 
The Holy Spirit does what 
God would have Him do, and has ALWAYS done so. 
He has SEEN 
separation, but KNOWS of union. 
He TEACHES healing, but He 
also KNOWS of creation. 
He would have you see and teach as He 
does, and through Him. 
But what He knows, you do NOT know, 
though it is yours. 
NOW it is given you to heal and teach, to make 
what WILL BE, now. 
As yet it is NOT now. 
The Son of God believes 
that he is lost in guilt, alone in a dark world, where pain is pressing 
everywhere upon him, FROM WITHOUT. 
When he has looked 
within, and seen the radiance there, he will remember how much his 
Father loves him. 
And it will seem incredible that he had ever 
thought his Father loved him not, and looked upon him as con¬ 
demned. 


T 13 D 8. 
The moment that you realize GUILT IS INSANE, WHOLLY 
unjustified, and WHOLLY without reason, you will NOT fear to 
look upon Atonement, and ACCEPT IT WHOLLY. 
You who have 
been unmerciful unto yourselves, do not remember your Father's 
love. 
And, looking without mercy upon your brothers, you do not 
remember how much YOU love HIM. 
Yet it is forever true. 
In shin¬ 
ing peace within you, is the perfect purity in which you were cre¬ 
ated. 
Fear not to look upon the lovely truth in you. 
Look 
THROUGH the cloud of guilt that dims your vision, and look PAST 
darkness, to the holy place where you will see the light. 


T 13 D 9. 
The altar to your Father is as pure as He Who raised it to 
Himself. 
Nothing can keep FROM you what Christ would have you 
see. 
His will is like His Father's, and He offers mercy to every Child 
of God, as He would have YOU do. 
RELEASE from guilt, as you 
would BE released. 
There is no other way to look within, and see the 
light of love shining as steadily, and as surely, as God Himself has 
always loved His Son. 
AND AS HIS SON LOVES HIM. 
There is no 
fear in love, 519 for love is guiltless. 
You who have ALWAYS loved 


519 1 John 4:18 There is no fear in love: but perfect love casteth out fear, because fear hath punishment; 
and he that feareth is not made perfect in love. 



477 


1-467 



Volume I Text 


your Father can have no fear, for ANY reason, to look within, and 
see your holiness. 


T 13 D 10 . 
You CANNOT be as you believed you WERE. 
Your guilt is 
without reason, because it is not in the Mind of God, where YOU 
are. 
And this IS T(519) - 346 - reason, which the Holy Spirit would RE¬ 
STORE to you. 
He would remove ONLY illusions. 
All else He 
would have you see. 
And in Christ's vision He would show you the 
perfect purity that is forever within God's Son. 
You cannot enter 
into REAL relationship with ANY of God's Sons, unless you love 
them all, and EQUALLY. 
Love is not special. 
If you single out PART 
of the Sonship for your love, you are imposing guilt on ALL your 
relationships, and MAKING them unreal. 


T 13 D 11 . 
You can love ONLY as God loves. 
Seek not to love UNLIKE 
Him, for there IS no love apart from His. 
Until you recognize that 
this is true, you will have no idea WHAT LOVE IS LIKE. 
No-one 
who condemns a brother, can see HIMSELF as guiltless in the peace 
of God. 
520 If he IS guiltless and in peace, AND SEES IT NOT, he IS 
delusional, and has NOT looked upon himself. 
To him I say, "Be¬ 
hold the Son of God, 521 and look upon his purity, and be still. 
In 
quiet, look upon his holiness, and offer thanks unto his Father, that 
no guilt has ever touched him." 

T 13 D 12. 
No illusion that you have ever held against him, has 
touched his innocence in any way. 
His shining purity, wholly un¬ 
touched by guilt, and wholly loving, is bright within you. 
Let us 
look upon him together, and love him. 
For in our love of him IS 
your guiltlessness. 
But look upon yourself, and gladness and appre¬ 
ciation for what you will 522 see, will banish guilt forever. 
I thank 


520 1 John 2:9 He who says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness until now. 


1 John 4:20 If someone says, “I love God,” and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he who does not love 
his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? 

21 Psalm 46:10 Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth! 

522 Notes and HLC omit “will see” and simply read “see.” 


1-468 


478 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


You, Father, for the purity of Your most holy Son, whom Thou hast 
created guiltless forever. 
523 

T 13 D 13. 
Like you, my faith and my belief are centered on what I 
treasure. 
The difference is that I love ONLY what God loves WITH 
me, and, because of this, I treasure you beyond the value that you 
set on yourselves, even unto the worth that God has placed upon 
you. 
I love all that He created. 
And all my faith and my belief I offer 
unto it. 
My faith in 524 you is strong as all the love I give my Father. 

My trust in you is without limit, and without the fear that you will 
hear me not. 
I thank the Father for your loveliness, and for the many 
gifts that you will let me offer to the Kingdom, in honor of its 
wholeness that is of God. 
T(520) - 347 - 

T 13 D 14. 
Praise be unto you, who make the Father One with His 
Own Son. 
Alone we are all lowly, but together, we shine with 
brightness so intense, that none of us alone can even think on it. 
Be¬ 
fore the glorious radiance of the Kingdom, guilt melts away, and, 
transformed into kindness, will never more be what it was. 
Every 
reaction that you experience will be so purified, that it is fitting as a 
hymn of praise unto your Father. 
See only praise of Him in what He 
has created, for He will never cease His praise of YOU. 
United in 
this praise, we stand before the gates of Heaven, where we will 
surely enter, in our blamelessness. 
God loves you. 
Could I, then, 
lack faith in you, and love Him perfectly? 

T 13 D 15. 
Forgetfulness and sleep, and even death, become the ego's 
best advice for how to deal with the perceived and harsh intrusion 
of guilt on peace. 
Yet no-one sees himself in conflict, and ravaged by 
a cruel war, unless he believes that BOTH "opponents" in the war 
are real. 
Believing this, he must escape, for such a war would surely 
end his peace of mind, and so destroy him. 
But if he could but real- 


523 Matthew 11:25 At that time Jesus answered and said,” I thank You, Father, Lord of heaven and 
earth, that You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent and have revealed them to babes.” 
John 11:41 Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead man was lying. 
And Jesus 
lifted up His eyes and said, “Father, I thank You that You have heard Me. 


524 Notes and HLC have “my faith in you is strong” while the Ur manuscript reads “my faith is you” 
which appears to be an obvios typing mistake. 



479 


1-469 




Volume I Text 


ize the war is between forces that are real and UNREAL powers, he 
could look upon himself, and SEE his freedom. 
No-one finds himself 
ravaged and torn in endless battles, which he HIMSELF perceives as 
wholly without meaning. 


T 13 D 16. 
God would not have His Son embattled, and so His Son's 
imagined "enemy," which he made, is TOTALLY unreal. 
You are 
but trying to escape a bitter war from which you HAVE escaped. 


The war is gone. 
For you have heard the hymn of freedom, rising 
unto Heaven. 
Gladness and joy belong to God for your release, be¬ 
cause YOU made it not. 
But, as you made not freedom, so you made 
not a war that could ENDANGER freedom. 
Nothing destructive 
ever was, or will be. 
The war, the guilt, the past, are gone as one, 
into the unreality from whence they came. 
T(521) -348 525 

T 13 E. 
The Guarantee of Heaven (Notes 1156 8:260) 

T 13 E l. 
When we are all united in Heaven, you will value NOTH¬ 
ING that you value here. 
For nothing that you value here you value 
wholly, and so you do not value it at all. 
Value is where God placed 
it, and the value of what God esteems CANNOT BE JUDGED, for it 
HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED. 
It is WHOLLY of value. 
It can merely 
be appreciated OR NOT. 
To value it partially is NOT TO KNOW ITS 
VALUE. 
In Heaven is everything God values, and nothing else. 

Heaven is perfectly unambiguous. 
Everything is clear and bright, 
and calls forth ONE response. 
There is no darkness, and there is no 
contrast. 
There is no variation. 
There is no interruption. 
There is a 
sense of peace so deep, that no dream in this world has ever brought 
even a dim imagining of what it is. 


T 13 E 2. 
Nothing in this world can give this peace, for nothing in this 
world is wholly shared. 
Perfect perception can merely show you 
what is CAPABLE of being wholly shared. 
It can also show you the 
RESULTS of sharing, while you still remember the results of NOT 
sharing. 
The Holy Spirit points quietly to the contrast, knowing that 
you will finally let Him judge the difference FOR you, allowing Him 

525 October 28, 1966 


1-470 


480 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


to demonstrate which MUST be true. 
He has perfect faith in your 
final judgment because He knows that HE WILL MAKE IT FOR 
YOU. 
To doubt this would be to doubt that His mission will be ful¬ 
filled. 
How is this possible, when His mission is of God? 

T 13 E 3. 
You whose minds are darkened by doubt and guilt, remem¬ 
ber this; God gave the Holy Spirit TO you, and gave HIM the mis¬ 
sion to REMOVE all doubt, and every trace of guilt, that His dear 
Son has laid upon himself. 
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE THAT THIS MISSION 
FAIL. 
T(522) -349 Nothing can prevent what God would HAVE ac¬ 
complished from accomplishment. 
Whatever your reactions to the 
Holy Spirit's voice may be, whatever voice you choose to listen to, 
whatever strange thoughts may occur to you, God's Will IS done. 

You WILL find the peace in which He has established you, because 
HE does NOT change His Mind. 
He is invariable as the peace in 
which you dwell, and of which the Holy Spirit reminds you. 


T 13 E 4. 
You will not remember change and shift in Heaven. 
You 
have need of contrast only here. 
Contrast and differences are neces¬ 
sary teaching aids, for by them you learn what to avoid, and what to 
seek. 
When you have LEARNED this, you will find the answer that 
makes the need for ANY differences disappear. 
Truth comes of its 
OWN will, unto its own. 
When you have learned that you BELONG 
to truth, it will flow lightly over you, without a difference of ANY 
kind. 
For you will NEED no contrast to help you realize that THIS IS 
WHAT YOU WANT, and ONLY this. 


T 13 E 5. 
Fear not the Holy Spirit will fail in what your Father has 
given Him to do. 
THE WILL OF GOD CAN FAIL IN NOTHING. 

Have faith in only this one thing, and it will be sufficient; God wills 
you be in Heaven, and nothing can keep you FROM it, or IT from 
you. 
Your wildest misperceptions, your weird imaginings, your 
blackest nightmares all mean nothing. 
They will not prevail against 
the peace God wills for you. 
The Holy Spirit WILL restore your san- 


481 


1-471 



Volume I Text 


ity, because insanity is NOT the Will of God. 
If that suffices Him, 526 
it is enough for you. 
You will NOT keep what God would have re¬ 
moved, because it breaks communication with you, with whom He 
would communicate. 
His voice WILL be heard. 
T(523) -350 

T 13 E 6. 
The communication link which God Himself placed within 
you, joining your minds with His, CANNOT be broken. 
You may 
believe you WANT it broken, and this belief DOES interfere with 
the deep peace, in which the sweet and constant communication 
which God would SHARE with you, is known. 
Yet His channels of 
reaching out CANNOT be wholly closed, and separated FROM 
Him. 
Peace will be yours, because His peace still flows to you, from 
Him Whose Will IS peace. 
YOU HAVE IT NOW. 
The Holy Spirit 
will teach you how to USE it, and by PROJECTING it, to learn that it 
IS in you. 


T 13 E 7. 
God willed you Heaven, and will ALWAYS will you noth¬ 
ing else. 
The Holy Spirit knows ONLY of His Will. 
There is no 
chance that Heaven will not be yours, for God is sure, and what He 
wills is sure as He is. 
You will learn salvation, because you will 
learn HOW TO SAVE. 
It will not be possible to exempt yourself 
from what the Holy Spirit wills to teach you. 
Salvation is as sure as 
God. 
His certainty suffices. 
Learn that even the darkest nightmare 
that disturbed the mind of God's sleeping Son, holds no power over 
him. 
He WILL learn the lesson of awaking. 
God watches over him, 
and light surrounds him. 


T 13 E 8. 
Can God's Son lose himself in dreams, when God has placed 
WITHIN him the glad call to awaken and be glad? He cannot sepa¬ 
rate himself from what is IN him. 
His sleep will not withstand the 
call to wake. 
The mission of redemption will be fulfilled, as surely as 
the Creation will remain unchanged throughout Eternity. 
You do 
NOT have to know that Heaven is yours, to MAKE it so. 
It IS so. 
But 
the will of God must be accepted AS your will, to KNOW it. 
The 


526 2 Corinthians 12:9 And He said to me, "My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made 
perfect in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of 
Christ may rest upon me. 



1-472 


482 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


Holy Spirit CANNOT fail to undo FOR you everything T(524) -351 
that you have learned, that teaches you what is NOT true must be 
RECONCILED with truth. 
This is the reconciliation which the ego 
would substitute for your reconciliation unto sanity and unto peace. 


T 13 E 9. 
The Holy Spirit has a very different kind of reconciliation in 
His mind for you, and one which HE WILL EFFECT, as surely as the 
ego will NOT effect what it attempts. 
Failure is of the ego, NOT of 
God. 
From Him you CANNOT wander, and there is no possibility 
that the plan the Holy Spirit offers to everyone, for the salvation OF 
everyone, will not be perfectly accomplished. 
You WILL be released, 
and you will NOT remember anything you made that was not cre¬ 
ated FOR you, and BY you in return. 
For how can you remember 
what was never true, or NOT remember what has always been? It is 
this reconciliation with truth, and ONLY truth, in which the peace of 
Heaven lies. 
T(525) -352 527 

T 13 F. 
The Testimony of Miracles (Notes 1166 9:3) 

T 13 F l. 
Yes, you are blessed indeed. 
But in this world, you do not 
know it. 
Yet you have the means for LEARNING it, and SEEING it 
quite clearly. 
The Holy Spirit uses logic as easily, and as well, as 
does the ego, except that HIS conclusions are NOT insane. 
They take 
a direction EXACTLY opposite, pointing as clearly to Heaven as the 
ego points to darkness and to death. 
We have followed much of the 
ego's logic, and have seen its logical conclusions. 
And HAVING 
seen them, we have realized that they can NOT be seen but in delu¬ 
sions. 
For there alone their SEEMING clearness SEEMS TO BE 
CLEARLY SEEN. 
Let us now turn AWAY from them, and follow the 
simple logic, by which the Holy Spirit teaches you the simple con¬ 
clusions that speak for truth, and ONLY truth. 


T 13 F 2. 
If you are blessed and do not know it, you need to learn it 
MUST be so. 
The KNOWLEDGE is not taught, but its conditions 
MUST be acquired, for it is THEY that have been thrown away. 
You 
CAN LEARN to bless, and CANNOT give WHAT YOU HAVE 


527 November 2, 1966 


483 


1-473 



Volume I Text 


NOT. 
If, then, you OFFER blessing, it MUST have come FIRST TO 
YOURSELF. 
And you must also have ACCEPTED IT AS YOURS, for 
how else could you GIVE IT AWAY? This is WFFY your miracles 
offer YOU the testimony that YOU are blessed. 
If what you offer IS 
complete forgiveness, you MUST have LET GUILT GO, accepting 
the Atonement for yourself, and learning you ARE guiltless. 
Flow 
could you learn what has been done for you, BUT WFFICFF YOU DO 
NOT KNOW, unless you do what you would FLAVE to do, if it 
FFAD BEEN done unto you? 

T 13 F 3. 
INDIRECT proof of truth is needed in a world made of de¬ 
nial, and without direction. 
You will perceive the need for this, if 
you will realize that to DENY is the decision NOT to know. 
The 
logic of the world MUST therefore lead to nothing, for its GOAL is 
nothing. 
If you decide to have and give and BE nothing except a 
dream, you MUST direct your thoughts unto oblivion. 
And if you 
have and give and are EVERYTHING, and ALL THIS HAS BEEN 
DENIED, your thought system is closed off, and wholly separated 
from the truth. 
T(526) -353 This IS an insane world, and do not under¬ 
estimate the actual extent of its insanity. 
There is no area of your 
perception that it has not touched, and your dream IS sacred to you. 

T 13 F 4. 
That is why God placed the Holy Spirit IN you, where YOU 
placed the dream. 
Seeing is ALWAYS outward. 
Were your thoughts 
wholly of YOU, the thought-system which YOU have made, 
WOULD be forever dark. 
The thoughts which the mind of God's 
Son projects, HAVE all the power that he gives them. 
The thoughts 
he shares with God are BEYOND his belief, but those HE made ARE 
his beliefs. 
And it is THESE, and NOT the truth, that he has chosen 
to defend and love. 
They will not be taken from him. 
But they CAN 
be given up BY him, for the Source of their undoing is IN him. 
There 
is NOTHING in the world to teach him that the logic of the world is 
totally insane, and leads to nothing. 
But in him who MADE this in¬ 
sane logic, there is One Who KNOWS it leads to nothing, for He 
knows of EVERYTHING. 



1-474 


484 


Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


T 13 F 5. 
Any direction which will lead you where the Holy Spirit 
leads you NOT, goes nowhere. 
Anything you deny, which He 
knows to be true, you have denied YOURSELF, and He must there¬ 
fore teach you NOT to deny it. 
Undoing IS indirect, as DOING is. 

You were created ONLY to create, neither to see NOR do. 
These are 
but INDIRECT expressions of the will to live, which has been 
blocked by the capricious and unholy whim of death and murder, 
that your Father shared not WITH you. 
You have set yourselves the 
task of sharing what can NOT be shared. 
And while you think it 
possible to LEARN to do this, you will NOT believe all that IS pos¬ 
sible to learn to do. 


T 13 F 6. 
The Holy Spirit, therefore, must begin His teaching, by 
showing you what you can NEVER learn. 
His MESSAGE is not indi¬ 
rect, but He must introduce the simple truth into a thought-system 
which has become so T(527) -354 twisted and so complex, that you 
CANNOT SEE that it means nothing. 
HE merely looks at its founda¬ 
tion, and DISMISSES it. 
But YOU, who CANNOT undo what you 
have made, nor escape the heavy burden of it's dullness that lies 
upon your minds, cannot see THROUGH it. 
It DECEIVES you, be¬ 
cause you chose to deceive YOURSELVES. 
Those who choose to BE 
deceived, will merely ATTACK direct approaches, which would 
seem but to ENCROACH upon deception, and strike at it. 


T 13 G. 
The Happy Learner (Notes 1170 9:7) 

T 13 G1 . 
The Holy Spirit needs a happy learner, in whom His mission 
can be happily accomplished. 
You who are steadfastly devoted to 
misery, MUST first recognize that you ARE miserable and NOT 
happy. 
The Holy Spirit cannot teach WITHOUT this contrast, for 
you believe that misery IS happiness. 
This has so confused you, that 
you have undertaken to learn to do what you can NEVER do, be¬ 
lieving that, UNLESS you learn it, you will NOT be happy. 
You do 
NOT realize that the foundation on which this most peculiar learn¬ 
ing goal depends, means ABSOLUTELY NOTHING. 
This DOES 
make sense to you. 



485 


1-475 


Volume I Text 


T 13 G 2. 
Have faith in nothing, 528 and you will FIND the treasure that 
you sought. 
But you will add another burden to your mind, AL¬ 
READY burdened, or you would NOT have sought another. 
You 
will believe that NOTHING IS OF VALUE, and will VALUE it. 
A 
little piece of glass, a speck of dust, a body, or a war, are one to you. 

For if you value ONE thing made of nothing, you HAVE believed 
that nothing CAN be precious, and that you CAN learn how to 
make the UNtrue true. 
The Holy Spirit, SEEING where you are, but 
KNOWING you are elsewhere, begins His lesson in simplicity with 
the fundamental teaching that TRUTH IS TRUE. 
This is the hardest 
lesson you will ever learn, and in the end, the ONLY one. 
T(528) - 355 - 
T 13 G 3. 
Simplicity is very difficult for twisted minds. 
Consider all 
the distortions you have made of nothing; all the strange forms and 
feelings, and actions and reactions, that you have woven out of it. 

Nothing is so alien to you as the simple truth and nothing are you 
LESS inclined to listen to. 
The contrast between what is true, and 
what is not, is PERFECTLY apparent, yet you do NOT see it. 
The 
simple and the obvious are NOT apparent to those who would 
make palaces and royal robes of nothing, believing they are kings 
with golden crowns BECAUSE of them. 
All this the Holy Spirit sees, 
and teaches, simply, that ALL THIS IS NOT TRUE. 


T 13 G 4. 
To these unhappy learners, who would teach themselves 
nothing, and delude themselves into believing that it is NOT noth¬ 
ing, the Holy Spirit says, with steadfast quietness, "The truth is true. 

Nothing else matters, nothing else is real, and EVERYTHING beside 
it is not there. 
Let Me make the one distinction FOR you, which you 
CANNOT make, but NEED to learn. 
Your faith in nothing IS deceiv¬ 
ing you. 
Offer your faith to Me, and I will place it gently in the holy 
place where it belongs. 
You will find NO deception there, but only 
the simple Truth. 
And you will love it, because you will UNDER¬ 
STAND it." 


528 Matthew 6:21 “For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.” 


1-476 


486 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


T 13 G 5. 
Like you, the Holy Spirit did NOT make truth. 
Like God, He 
KNOWS it to be true. 
He brings the LIGHT of truth into the dark¬ 
ness, and LETS it shine on you. 
529 And as it shines, YOUR BROTH¬ 
ERS see it, and, realizing that this light is NOT what you have made, 
they see in you MORE than YOU see. 
They will be happy learners of 
the lesson which this light brings to them, because it teaches them 
release from nothing, and from all the works of nothing. 
The heavy 
chains which SEEM to bind them unto despair, they do NOT see as 
nothing, until YOU bring the light TO them. 
And THEN they see the 
chains have disappeared, and so they MUST have been nothing. 


T 13 G 6. 
And YOU will see it WITH them. 
BECAUSE you taught 
them gladness and release, they will become YOUR teachers in re¬ 
lease and gladness. 
When you teach ANYONE that truth is true, 
YOU LEARN IT WITH HIM. 
And so you learn T(529) - 356 - that what 
seemed hardest was the easiest. 
Learn to be happy learners. 
You 
will NEVER learn how to make nothing everything. 
But see that this 
HAS BEEN your goal, and RECOGNIZE how foolish it has been. 
Be 
glad it is undone, for, when you look at it in simple honesty, it IS 
undone. 
We said before, "Be not content with nothing," for you 
HAVE believed that nothing COULD content you. 
IT IS NOT SO. 


T 13 G 7. 
If you would be a happy learner, you must give EVERY¬ 
THING that YOU have learned over to the Holy Spirit, to be 
UNlearned FOR you. 
And THEN begin to learn the joyous lessons 
that come quickly, on the firm foundation that truth is true. 
For 
what is builded there IS true, and BUILT on truth. 
530 The universe of 
learning will open up before you, in all its gracious simplicity. 
With 


529 Numbers 6:24-25 The LORD make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: The 
LORD lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. 


Luke 1:79 “To give light to those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death, To guide our feet into 
the way of peace. 
“ 

John 1:5 And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it. 


530 John 1:5 “Therefore whoever hears these sayings of Mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise 
man who built his house on the rock: and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and 
beat on that house; and it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock.” 

Matthew 7:24-27 “But everyone who hears these sayings of Mine, and does not do them, will be like a 
foolish man who built his house on the sand: and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds 
blew and beat on that house; and it fell. 
And great was its fall.” 


487 


1-477 



Volume I Text 


truth before you, you will not look back. 
The happy learner meets 
the conditions of learning here, as he also meets the conditions of 
knowledge in the Kingdom. 


T 13 G 8. 
All this lies in the Holy Spirit's plan to free you from the 
past, and open up the way to freedom FOR you. 
For truth IS true. 

What else could ever be, or ever was? This simple lesson holds the 
key to the dark door, which you believe is locked forever. 
You 
MADE this door OF nothing, and behind it IS nothing. 
The key is 
only the light which shines away the shapes and forms and fears of 
nothing. 
Accept this key to freedom, from the hands of Christ, Who 
gives it to you, that you may join Him in the holy task of bringing 
light to darkness. 
For, like your brothers, YOU do not realize the 
light has come, and freed you from the sleep of darkness. 


T 13 G 9. 
Behold your brothers in their freedom, and learn of them 
how to be FREE of darkness. 
The light in you will waken them, and 
they will not leave YOU asleep. 
The Vision of Christ is GIVEN, the 
very instant that it is perceived. 
Where everything is clear, it is ALL 
holy. 
The quietness of its simplicity is so compelling, that you will 
realize IT IS IMPOSSIBLE TO DENY THE SIMPLE TRUTH. 
For 
there IS nothing else. 
God is everywhere, and His Son is IN Him 
WITH everything. 
Can he sing the dirge of sorrow, when THIS is 
true? T(530) - 357 - 531 

T 13 H. 
The Decision for Guiltlessness (Notes 1182 9:19) 

T 13 H 1. 
Learning will be commensurate with motivation, and the 
interference in your motivation for learning, is EXACTLY the same 
as that which interferes with ALL your thinking. 
The happy learner 
CANNOT FEEL GUILTY ABOUT LEARNING. 
This is so ESSEN¬ 
TIAL to learning, that it should never be forgotten. 
The guiltless 
learner learns so easily, BECAUSE HIS THOUGHTS ARE FREE. 
But 
this entails the recognition that GUILT IS INTERFERENCE, NOT 
SALVATION, and serves NO useful function at all. 



531 November 6, 1966. 



1-478 


488 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


T 13 H 2. 
You are accustomed to using guiltlessness merely to offset 
the pain of guilt, and do not look upon it as having value IN ITSELF. 

You believe that guilt AND guiltlessness are BOTH of value, each 
representing an ESCAPE from what the other does NOT offer you. 

You do NOT want either alone, for without both, you do not see 
YOURSELVES as whole, and therefore happy. 
You are whole ONLY 
in your guiltlessness, and only in your guiltlessness, CAN you be 
happy. 
There IS no conflict here. 


T 13 H 3. 
To wish for guilt in ANY way, in ANY form, will lose 532 ap¬ 
preciation of the value of your guiltlessness, and push it from your 
sight. 
There is NO compromise that you can make with guilt, and 
escape from the pain which ONLY guiltlessness allays. 
Learning is 
living here, as creating is Being in Heaven. 
Whenever the pain of 
guilt seems to ATTRACT you, remember that, if you yield to it, you 
are deciding AGAINST your happiness, and will NOT learn how to 
be happy. 
Say, therefore, to yourself, gently, but with the conviction 
born of the love of God and of His Son: 

What I experience I will make manifest. 


If I am guiltless, I have nothing to fear. 


I choose to testify to my ACCEPTANCE of the Atonement, 

NOT FOR ITS REJECTION. 


I would accept my guiltlessness by making it manifest, 
and SHARING it. 


Let me bring peace to God's Son from his Father. 
T(53i) - 358 
T 13 H 4. 
Each 533 day, each hour and minute, - even each second, - you 
are deciding between the crucifixion and the Resurrection; between 
the ego and the Holy Spirit. 
The ego is the choice for guilt, the Holy 
Spirit the decision for blamelessness. 
The power of decision is all 
that is yours. 
What you can decide BETWEEN is fixed, because there 
are no alternatives, EXCEPT truth and illusion. 
And there is no over¬ 
lap between them, because they are opposites which CANNOT be 


532 The Urtext manuscript has this as “lost” but both the earlier Notes and the alter HLC have this is as 
“lose” which suggests “lost” was a typo. 


533 Nov. 
12, 1966 


489 


1-479 



Volume I Text 


reconciled, and CANNOT both be true. 
You are guilty OR guiltless, 
bound OR free, happy OR unhappy. 


T 13 H 5. 
The miracle teaches you that you have chosen guiltlessness, 
freedom, and joy. 
It is not a cause, but an EFFECT. 
It is the natural 
result of CHOOSING RIGHT, attesting to your happiness that 
comes from choosing to be FREE of guilt. 
Everyone you offer heal¬ 
ing TO, returns it. 
Everyone you attack, KEEPS it and cherishes it, 
by holding it AGAINST you. 
Whether he DOES this, or does it not, 
will make no difference. 
YOU WILL THINK HE DOES. 
It is impos¬ 
sible to offer WHAT YOU DO NOT WANT, without this penalty. 

The cost of giving IS receiving. 
Either it is a penalty from which you 
suffer, or the happy purchase of a treasure to hold dear. 


T 13 H 6. 
No penalty is ever asked of God's Son, except BY himself 
and OF himself. 
Every chance given to him to heal, is another op¬ 
portunity to replace darkness with light, and fear with love. 
534 If he 
refuses it, he binds himself TO darkness because he did not choose 
to free his brother, and enter light WITH him. 
535 By GIVING power 
to nothing, he threw away the joyous opportunity to learn that noth¬ 
ing HAS no power. 
And, by NOT DISPELLING, darkness, HE be¬ 
came afraid of darkness AND of light. 
The joy of learning darkness 
has no power over the Son of God, is the happy lesson the Holy 
Spirit teaches, and would have YOU teach WITH Him. 
It is HIS joy 
to teach it, as it will be YOURS. 


T 13 H 7. 
The way to teach this simple lesson is merely this; guiltless¬ 
ness IS invulnerability. 
Therefore, make your INVULNERABILITY 
manifest to everyone, and teach him that, WHATEVER he may try 
to do to you, your perfect freedom from the belief that you can BE 
harmed, shows him HE is guiltless. 
He can do NOTHING that can 


534 1 John 1:5 “This is the message which we have heard from Him and declare to you, that God is light 
and in Him is no darkness at all.” 

1 John 2:8 Again, a new commandment I write to you, which thing is true in Him and in you, because 
the darkness is passing away, and the true light is already shining. 


535 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 

John 20:23 “If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you retain the sins of any, they 
are retained.” 


1-480 


490 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


hurt you, and by refusing to allow him to THINK HE CAN, you 
teach him T(532) - 359 - that the Atonement, which you have accepted 
for yourself, IS ALSO HIS. 
THERE IS NOTHING TO FORGIVE. 
No- 
one can hurt the Son of God. 
His guilt is WHOLLY without cause, 
and, being without cause, CANNOT exist. 


T 13 H 8. 
God is the ONLY Cause, and guilt is NOT of Him. 
Teach no- 
one he has hurt you, for, if you do, you teach YOURSELF that what 
is NOT of God, HAS POWER OVER YOU. 
THE CAUSELESS 
CANNOT BE. 
Do not attest to it, and do not foster belief in it in any 
mind. 
Remember always MIND IS ONE, and CAUSE IS ONE. 
You 
will learn communication with this Oneness ONLY when you learn 
to DENY the causeless, and accept the Cause of God as YOURS. 
The 
power that God has given to His Son IS his, and nothing else can 
His Son see, or choose to look upon, without imposing on HIMSELF 
the penalty of guilt, IN PLACE of all the happy teaching the Holy 
Spirit would gladly offer him. 


T 13 H 9. 
Whenever you decide to make decisions FOR YOURSELF, 
you are thinking self-destructively, and the decision WILL BE 
WRONG. 
It will hurt you, because of the CONCEPT of decision 
which led to it. 
It is not true that you can make decisions BY your¬ 
self, or FOR yourself alone. 
No thought of God's Son CAN be sepa¬ 
rate, or isolated in its effects. 
Every decision is made for the WHOLE 
SONSHIP, directed in and out, and influencing a constellation larger 
than anything you ever dreamed of. 
Those who accept Atonement, 
ARE invulnerable. 
But those who believe they are guilty, WILL re¬ 
spond to guilt, because THEY THINK IT IS SALVATION, and will 
NOT refuse to see it, and side WITH it. 
They BELIEVE that IN¬ 
CREASING guilt is self-PROTECTION. 
And they fail to understand 
the simple fact that, what they do NOT want, MUST hurt them. 


T 13 H10. 
All this arises because they do NOT believe that WHAT 
THEY WANT IS GOOD. 
Yet will was given them BECAUSE it is 
holy, and will bring TO them ALL that they need, coming as natu¬ 
rally as peace that knows no limits. 
There is NOTHING their wills 
will not provide, that offers them ANYTHING of value. 
But, be- 


491 


1-481 


Volume I Text 


cause they do NOT understand their will, the Holy Spirit quietly 
understands if 536 FOR them, and gives them what THEY will, with¬ 
out effort, strain, or the impossible burden of deciding WHAT 
THEY WANT AND NEED ALONE. 
It will never happen that you 
will have to make decisions FOR YOURSELF. 
You are NOT bereft of 
help, and HELP THAT KNOWS THE ANSWER. 
Would you be con¬ 
tent with little, which is all that YOU ALONE can T(533) - 360 - 537 offer 
yourself, when He Who GIVES YOU EVERYTHING will simply 
OFFER it TO you? 

T 13 H 11. 
He will never ask what you have done to make you worthy 
of the gift of God. 
Ask it not therefore of yourselves. 
Instead, accept 
His answer, for He KNOWS you are worthy of everything God wills 
FOR you. 
Do not try to escape the gift of God, which He so freely, 
and so gladly offers you. 
He offers you but what God gave Him 
FOR you. 
You need NOT decide whether or not you are DESERV¬ 
ING of it. 
GOD KNOWS THAT YOU ARE. 
Would you deny the 
truth of GOD'S decision, and place your pitiful appraisal of yourself, 
in place of His calm and unswerving value of His Son? NOTHING 
can shake God's conviction of the perfect purity of everything that 
He created, for it IS wholly pure. 
Do not decide AGAINST it, for be¬ 
ing of Him it MUST be true. 


T 13 H 12. 
Peace abides in every mind that quietly accepts the plan 
that GOD has set for his Atonement, RELINQUISHING HIS OWN. 

You know NOT of Salvation, for you do NOT understand it. 
Make 
no decisions about what it is, or where it lies, but ask of the Holy 
Spirit EVERYTHING, and leave ALL decisions to His gentle coun¬ 
sel. 
The One Who knows the plan, of God which God would have 
you follow, can teach you what it IS. 
Only His wisdom is capable of 
guiding you to follow it. 
Every decision you undertake alone but 
signifies that you would define what Salvation is, and what you 
would be saved FROM . 
The Holy Spirit KNOWS that ALL Salvation 


536 Notes and HLC have “it” here ... 
obvious typo. 


537 Nov. 
12, 1966 


1-482 


492 




Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


is escape from guilt. 
You have no other "enemy," and against this 
strange distortion of the purity of the Son of God, the Holy Spirit is 
your ONLY friend. 
T(534) -361 

T 13 H13. 
He is the strong protector of your innocence, which sets 
you free. 
538 And it is HIS decision to undo EVERYTHING that 
would obscure your innocence from your unclouded mind. 
Let 
Him, therefore, be the only guide that you would follow to Salva¬ 
tion. 
He knows the way, and leads you gladly on it. 
WITH Him, you 
will not fail to learn what God wills FOR you IS your will. 
WITH¬ 
OUT His guidance, you will think you know alone, and will decide 
AGAINST your peace, as surely as you made the wrong decision in 
ever thinking that Salvation lay in you alone. 
Salvation is of Him to 
Whom God GAVE it FOR you. 
He has not forgotten it. 
Forget HIM 
not, and He will make EVERY decision for you, for YOUR Salvation 
and the peace of God in you. 


T 13 H14. 
Seek not to appraise the worth of God's Son, whom He cre¬ 
ated holy, for to do so is TO EVALUATE HIS FATHER, and judge 
AGAINST Him. 
And you WILL feel guilty for this imagined 
"crime," which no one in this world, or Heaven, CAN POSSIBLY 
commit. 
God's Spirit teaches only that the "sin" of SELF replace¬ 
ment on the throne of God is NOT a source of guilt. 
What CANNOT 
happen, can have no effects to fear. 
Be quiet in your faith in Him, 
Who loves you, and would lead you out of insanity. 
Madness may 
be your CHOICE, but NOT your reality. 
Never forget the Love of 
God, Who HAS remembered you. 
For it is quite impossible that He 
could ever let His Son drop from His loving Mind, wherein he was 
created, and where his abode was fixed in perfect peace forever. 


T 13 H15. 
Say to the Holy Spirit only, "Decide for me," and it is done. 

For His decisions are reflections of WHAT GOD KNOWS ABOUT 
YOU, and in this light, error of ANY kind becomes impossible. 
Why 
would you struggle so frantically to anticipate all that you CAN¬ 
NOT know, T(535) -362 when ALL knowledge lies behind EVERY de- 


538 John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 


493 


1-483 



Volume I Text 


cision that the Holy Spirit makes FOR YOU? Learn of His wisdom 
and His love, and teach His answer to everyone who struggles in 
the dark. 
For you decide for THEM AND for yourself. 
How gracious 
is it to decide all things through Him, Whose equal love is given 
equally to all alike. 
He leaves you no one OUTSIDE yourself, alone 
WITHOUT you. 
And so He gives you what is yours, because your 
Father would have you share it WITH him. 


T 13 H 16. 
In everything be led by Him, and do not reconsider. 
Trust 
Him to answer quickly, surely, and with love for everyone who will 
be touched, in any way by the decision. 
And EVERYONE will be. 

Would you take unto yourself the sole responsibility for deciding 
what can bring ONLY good to everyone? Would you KNOW this? 
You taught YOURSELVES the most unnatural habit of NOT com¬ 
municating with your Creator. 
Yet you remain in close communica¬ 
tion with Him, and with everything that is within Him, as it is 
within YOURSELF. 
UNlearn isolation through His loving guidance, 
and learn of all the happy communication that you have thrown 
away, but could NOT lose. 


T 13 H 17. 
Whenever you are in doubt what you should do, think of 
His Presence in you, and tell yourself this, and ONLY this: "He 
leadeth me, 539 and knows the way, which I know not. 
Yet He will 
never KEEP from me what He would have me LEARN. 
And so I 
trust Him to communicate to me all that He knows FOR me." Then 
let Him teach you quietly how to perceive your guiltlessness, which 
is ALREADY there. 
T(536) -363 

T 13 I. 
The Way of Salvation (Notes 1190 9:27) 

T 13 11 . 
When you accept a brother's guiltlessness, you will SEE 
Atonement in him. 
For, by proclaiming it in HIM, you make it 
YOURS, and you WILL see what you sought. 
You will not see the 
symbol of your brother's guiltlessness shining within him, while 
you still believe IT IS NOT THERE. 
HIS guiltlessness is YOUR 


539 Psalm 23:2-3 He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; He leadeth me beside the still waters. 
He 
restoreth my soul; He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness For His name’s sake. 



1-484 


494 



Chapter 13 - From Perception to Knowledge 


Atonement. 
Grant it to him, and you will see the truth of what you 
have acknowledged. 
Yet truth is offered FIRST, to be received, even 
as God gave it first to His Son. 
The first in time means nothing, but 
the First in Eternity is God the Father, Who is both First and One. 

Beyond the First, there is no other, for there is no order, no second 
or third, and nothing BUT the First. 


T 13 12 . 
You who belong to the First Cause, created by Him like unto 
Himself, and part of Him, are more than merely guiltless. 
The state 
of guiltlessness is only the condition in which what is NOT there has 
been REMOVED, from the disordered mind that THOUGHT it 
WAS. 
This state, and only this, must YOU attain with God beside 
you. 
For until you do, you will still think that you are separate 
FROM Him. 
You can feel His Presence NEXT TO you, but CAN¬ 
NOT know that you are one with Him. 
This need not be taught. 

Learning applies ONLY to the condition IN WHICH IT HAPPENS 
of itself. 


T 13 13. 
When you have let all that has obscured the truth in your 
most holy mind be undone for you, and stand in grace before your 
Father, He will give Himself to you, as He has ALWAYS done. 
Giv¬ 
ing Himself is all He knows, and so it is ALL knowledge. 
For what 
He knows NOT cannot be, and therefore CANNOT BE GIVEN. 
Ask 
not to BE forgiven, for this has already been accomplished. 
Ask 
rather to LEARN how to forgive, and restore WHAT ALWAYS 
WAS to your unforgiving mind. 
Atonement becomes real and visi¬ 
ble, to them that USE it. 
On earth, it is your ONLY function, and you 
T(537) -364 must learn that it is all you WANT to learn. 


T 1314. 
You WILL feel guilty 'til you learn this. 
For, in the end, 
whatever form it takes, your guilt arises from your failure to fulfill 
your function in God's Mind with ALL OF YOURS. 
Can you ES¬ 
CAPE this guilt, by failing to fulfill your function HERE? You need 
not understand creation, to do what must be done, BEFORE that 
knowledge would be meaningful to you. 
God breaks no barriers; 
neither did He MAKE them. 
When YOU release them, they are 
gone. 
God will not fail, nor ever has, in anything. 



495 


1-485 


Volume I Text 


T 13 I 5. 
Decide that God is right, and YOU are wrong, about your¬ 
self. 
He created you out of Himself, but still WITHIN Him. 
He 
knows what you are. 
Remember that there is no second to Him. 

There cannot, therefore, be anyone WITHOUT His Holiness, nor 
anyone unworthy of His perfect love. 
Fail not in your function of 
loving in a loveless place, made out of darkness and deceit, for thus 
are darkness and deception UNdone. 
FAIL NOT YOURSELF, but 
instead, offer to God AND YOU His blameless Son. 
For this small 
gift of appreciation FOR His love, God will Himself exchange your 
gift for HIS. 


T 1316 . 
Before you make ANY decisions for yourself, remember that 
YOU HAVE DECIDED AGAINST YOUR FUNCTION IN HEAVEN, 
and consider carefully whether you WANT to make decisions here. 

Your function here is only to decide AGAINST deciding what you 
want, in recognition that YOU DO NOT KNOW. 
How, then, CAN 
you decide what you should do? Leave ALL decisions to the One 
Who speaks for God, and for your function as He KNOWS it. 
So will 
He teach you to remove the awful burden you have laid upon your¬ 
self, by loving not the Son of God, and trying to teach him guilt IN¬ 
STEAD of love. 
Give up this frantic and insane attempt, T(538) -365 
which cheats you of the joy of living with your God and Father, and 
awaking gladly to His Love and Holiness, which join together as 
truth in YOU, making you One with Him. 


T 1317. 
When you have learned how to decide WITH God, ALL de¬ 
cisions become as easy and as right as breathing. 
There is no effort, 
and you will be led as gently, as if you were being carried along a 
quiet path in summer. 
Only your own volition seems to make decid¬ 
ing hard. 
The Holy Spirit will not delay at all in answering your 
EVERY question what to do. 
He KNOWS. 
And He will TELL you, 
and then do it FOR you. 
You who are tired might consider whether 
this is not more restful than sleep. 
For you can bring your guilt into 
sleeping, but NOT into this. 
T(539) - 366 - 540 


540 November 16, 1966. 



1-486 


496 



Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions To Truth 

T 14 A . 
Introduction (Notes 1196 9 : 33 ) 

T 14 A l. 
Unless you are guiltless you cannot know God, Whose Will 
is that you know Him. 
Therefore, you MUST be guiltless. 
But, if you 
do not accept the necessary conditions for knowing Him, YOU 
HAVE DENIED HIM, and do not recognize Him, though He is all 
around you. 
He cannot be known without His Son, whose guiltless¬ 
ness IS the condition for knowing Him. 
Accepting His Son as guilty 
is denial of the Father so complete, that knowledge is swept away 
from recognition, in the very mind where God Himself has placed it. 

If you would but listen, and learn how impossible this is! Do not 
endow Him with attributes YOU understand. 
You made Him not, 
and anything YOU understand, is not of Him. 


T 14 A 2. 
Your task is not to make reality. 
It is here, WITHOUT your 
making, but NOT without YOU. 
You who have thrown your selves 
away, and valued God so little, hear me speak for Him, and for 
yourselves. 
You cannot understand how much your Father loves 
you, for there is no parallel in your experience of the world to help 
you understand it. 
There is nothing on earth with which it can com¬ 
pare, and nothing you have ever felt, APART from Him, that resem¬ 
bles it ever so faintly. 
You cannot even give a blessing in perfect 
gentleness. 
Would you know of One Who gives forever, and Who 
knows of nothing EXCEPT giving? 

T 14 A 3. 
The Children of Heaven live in the light of the blessing of 
their Father, because THEY KNOW THAT THEY ARE SINLESS. 


The Atonement was established as the means of restoring guiltless¬ 
ness to the mind which has denied it, and thus denied Heaven to 
Itself. 
Atonement teaches you the true condition of the Son of God. 


It does NOT teach you what you are, or what your Father is. 
The 
Holy Spirit, Who remembers this FOR you, merely teaches you how 
to REMOVE the blocks that stand between you and what YOU 
know. 
His memory is YOURS. 
If you remember what YOU have 


497 


1-487 


Volume I Text 


made, you are remembering nothing. 
Remembrance of reality is in 
HIM, and THEREFORE in you. 


T 14 B. 
Guilt and Guiltlessness (Notes 1198 9:35) 

T 14 B l. 
The guiltless and the guilty are totally incapable of under¬ 
standing one T(540) - 367 - another. 
Each perceives the other AS LIKE 
HIMSELF, making them unable to communicate, because each sees 
the other UNLIKE the way he sees himself. 
God can communicate 
ONLY to the Holy Spirit in your mind, because only He shares the 
knowledge of what you are WITH God. 
And only the Holy Spirit 
can answer God for YOU, for only He knows what God IS. 
Every¬ 
thing ELSE, that YOU have placed within your mind, CANNOT ex¬ 
ist, for what is not in communication with the Mind of God, has 
never been. 
Communication with God is Life. 
Nothing without it IS 
at all. 


T 14 B 2. 
The only part of your mind that has reality, is the part that 
links you still with God. 
Would you have ALL of it transformed into 
a radiant message of God's Love, to share with all the lonely ones, 
who have denied Him with you? GOD MAKES THIS POSSIBLE. 

Would you deny His yearning to be known? You yearn for Him, as 
He for you. 
This is forever changeless. 
Accept, then, the immutable. 

Leave the world of death behind, and return quietly to Heaven. 

There is NOTHING of value here, and EVERYTHING of value 
there. 
Listen to the Holy Spirit, and to God through Him. 
He speaks 
of you to YOU. 
There IS no guilt in you, for God is blessed in His 
Son, as the Son is blessed in Him. 


T 14 B 3. 
Each one of you has a special part to play in the Atonement, 
but the message given to each to share is always the same; GOD's 
SON IS GUILTLESS. 
Each one teaches the message differently, and 
learns it differently. 
But UNTIL he teaches it and learns it, he will 
suffer the pain of dim awareness, that his true function remains un¬ 
fulfilled in him. 
The burden of guilt is heavy, but God would not 
have you bound by it. 
HIS plan for your awaking is as perfect as 


1-488 


498 


Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


yours is fallible. 
You know not what you do , 541 but He Who knows 
is with you. 
His gentleness is yours, and all the love you share with 
God, He holds in trust for you. 
He would teach you nothing except 
how to be happy. 
T(541) - 368 - 

T 14 B 4. 
Blessed Son of a wholly blessing Father, joy was created FOR 
you. 
Who can condemn whom God has blessed? There is nothing in 
the Mind of God that does not share his shining innocence. 
Creation 
is the natural extension of perfect purity. 
Your only calling here is to 
devote yourself, with active willingness, to the denial of guilt in 
ALL its forms. 
To accuse is NOT TO UNDERSTAND. 
The happy 
learners of the Atonement become the teachers of the innocence that 
is the RIGHT of all that God created. 
Deny them not what is their 
due, for you will not withhold it from them alone. 


T 14 B 5. 
The inheritance of the Kingdom is the right of God's Son, 
given him in his creation. 
Do not try to steal it from him, or you will 
ASK for guilt and WILL experience it. 
PROTECT his purity from 
every thought that would steal it away, and keep it from his sight. 

BRING INNOCENCE TO LIGHT, in answer to the call of the 
Atonement. 
Never allow purity to remain hidden, but shine away 
the heavy veils of guilt, within which the Son of God has hidden 
himself from his own sight. 
We are all joined in the Atonement here, 
and nothing else can unite us in this world. 
So will the world of 
separation slip away, and full communication be restored between 
the Father and the Son. 


T 14 B 6. 
The miracle acknowledges the guiltlessness which MUST 
have been denied, to produce NEED of healing. 
Do not withhold 
this glad acknowledgment, for hope of happiness, and release from 
suffering of every kind, lies in it. 
Who is there but wishes to be free 
of pain? He may not yet have learned HOW to exchange his guilt for 
innocence, nor realize that ONLY in this exchange can freedom from 
pain be his. 
But those who have failed to learn need TEACHING, 


541 Luke 23:34 And Jesus said, “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.” And parting 
his garments among them, they cast lots. 



499 


1-489 



Volume I Text 


NOT attack. 
To attack those who have need of teaching is to fail to 
learn FROM them. 


T 14 B 7. 
Teachers of innocence, each in his own way, have joined to¬ 
gether, taking their part in the unified curriculum of the Atonement. 

There is no unity of learning goals apart from this. 
There is no con¬ 
flict in this curriculum, which has ONE aim, however it is taught. 

Each effort made on T(542) - 369 - its behalf is offered to the single 
purpose of RELEASE from guilt, to the eternal glory of God and His 
creation. 
And every teaching that points to this points straight to 
Heaven, and to the peace of God. 
There is no pain, no trial, no fear, 
that teaching this can fail to overcome. 
The power of God Himself 
supports this teaching, and GUARANTEES its limitless results 

T 14 B 8. 
Join your own efforts to the Power that cannot fail, and 
MUST result in peace. 
No-one can be untouched by teaching such as 
this. 
You will not see yourself BEYOND the power of God if you 
teach only this. 
You will NOT be exempt from the effect of this most 
holy lesson, which seeks but to restore what is the right of God's 
creation. 
From everyone whom you accord release from guilt, you 
will INEVITABLY learn YOUR innocence. 
The circle of Atonement 
HAS no end. 
And you will find ever-increasing confidence in your 
safe inclusion in what is for all, in everyone you bring within its 
safety and its perfect peace. 


T 14 B 9. 
Peace, then, be unto everyone who becomes a teacher of 
peace . 
542 For peace is the acknowledgment of perfect purity, from 
which no-one is excluded. 
Within its holy circle, is everyone whom 
God created as His Son. 
Joy is its unifying attribute, with no-one left 
outside, to suffer guilt alone. 
The power of God draws everyone to 
its safe embrace of love and union. 
Stand quietly within this circle, 
and attract all tortured minds to join with you, in the safety of its 
peace and holiness. 
Abide with me within it , 543 as teachers of 
Atonement, NOT of guilt. 



542 John 20:21 So Jesus said to them again, “Peace to you! As the Father has sent Me, I also send you.” 
542 John 15:10 “If you keep My commandments, you will abide in My love, just as I have kept My 
Father’s commandments and abide in His love.” 


1-490 


500 



Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


T 14 B 10 . 
Blessed are ye who teach with me. 
Our power comes not of 
us, but of our Father. 
In guiltlessness we know Him, as He knows us 
guiltless. 
I stand within the circle, calling YOU to peace. 
Teach peace 
with me, and stand with me on holy ground . 
544 Remember for eve¬ 
ryone your Father's power, that He has given them. 
Believe not that 
you cannot teach His perfect peace. 
Stand not outside, but join with 
me within. 
Fail not the only purpose to which MY teaching calls 
you. 
Restore to God His Son, as He created him, by teaching T(543) - 
370 - him his innocence. 


T 14 B 11. 
The crucifixion had no part in the Atonement. 
Only the 
Resurrection became my part in it. 
THAT is the symbol of the RE¬ 
LEASE from guilt, by guiltlessness. 
Whomever you perceive as 
guilty, you would crucify. 
But you RESTORE guiltlessness to 
whomever you SEE as guiltless. 
Crucifixion is ALWAYS the ego's 
aim. 
It SEES AS GUILTY, and BY its condemnation, IT WOULD 
KILL. 
The Holy Spirit sees only guiltlessness, and, in His gentleness. 

He would RELEASE from fear, and re-establish the reign of love. 


The power of love is in His gentleness, which is of God and there¬ 
fore cannot crucify, nor suffer crucifixion. 
The temple you restore 
becomes YOUR altar, for it was re-built through YOU. 
And every¬ 
thing you give to God IS yours. 
Thus He creates, and thus must 
YOU restore. 


T 14 B 12. 
Each one you see you place, within the holy circle of 
Atonement, or leave outside, judging him fit for crucifixion or re¬ 
demption. 
If you bring him INTO the circle of purity, you will rest 
there WITH him. 
If you leave him without, you JOIN him there. 

Judge not, except in quietness which is NOT of you . 
545 Refuse to ac¬ 
cept anyone as WITHOUT the blessing of Atonement, and bring 
him INTO it by blessing him. 
Holiness MUST be shared, for therein 
lies everything that makes it holy. 
Come gladly to the holy circle. 



544 Exodus 3:4-5 And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the 
midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. 
And he said, Here am I. 


And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou 
standest is holy ground. 


545 Matthew 7:1 “Judge not, that you be not judged.” 


501 


1-491 



Volume I Text 


and look out in peace on all who think they are outside. 
Cast no-one 
out, for this is what HE seeks along with you. 
Come, let us join him 
in the holy place of peace, which is for all of us, united as one, 
within the cause of peace. 
T(544) - 371 - 

T 14 C. 
Out of the Darkness (Notes 1208 9:45) 

T 14 c l. 
The 546 journey that we undertake together is the change of 
dark for light, of ignorance for understanding. 
NOTHING YOU 
UNDERSTAND IS FEARFUL. 
It is only in darkness and in igno¬ 
rance that you perceive the frightening, and you shrink away from it 
to further darkness. 
And yet, it is only the hidden that CAN terrify, 
NOT for what it IS, but FOR its hiddenness. 
The obscure is frighten¬ 
ing, BECAUSE you do not understand its meaning. 
If you did, IT 
would be clear, and you would be no longer in the dark. 
Nothing 
has HIDDEN value, for what is hidden CANNOT be shared, and so 
its value is unknown. 
The hidden is KEPT APART, but value AL¬ 
WAYS lies in joint appreciation. 
What is concealed CANNOT be 
loved, and so it MUST be feared. 


T 14 C 2. 
The quiet light in which the Holy Spirit dwells within you, is 
merely perfect openness, in which nothing is hidden, and therefore 
nothing is feared. 
Attack will ALWAYS yield to love, if it is brought 
TO love, not hidden FROM it. 
There is no darkness that the light of 
love will not dispel, unless it is concealed from love's beneficence. 

What is KEPT APART from love CANNOT share its healing power, 
because it has been separated off, and KEPT IN DARKNESS. 
The 
sentinels of darkness watch over it carefully, and you who made 
these guardians of illusion out of nothing, are now AFRAID of 
them. 


T 14 C 3. 
Would you continue to give imagined power to these 
strange ideas of safety? They are neither safe nor unsafe. 
They do 
not protect, NEITHER DO THEY ATTACK. 
They DO nothing at all, 
BEING nothing at all. 
As guardians of darkness and of ignorance, 
look to them ONLY for fear, for what they keep obscure IS fearful. 



546 November 22, 1966 


1-492 


502 



Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


But let them go, and what WAS fearful, will be so no longer. 
With¬ 
out protection of obscurity, ONLY the light of love remains, for only 
this HAS meaning, and CAN live in light. 
Everything else MUST 
disappear. 


T 14 c 4. 
Death yields to life, simply because destruction IS NOT 
TRUE. 
The light of guiltlessness shines guilt away because, when 
they are BROUGHT TOGETHER, the truth T(545) - 372 - of one MUST 
make the falsity of its OPPOSITE perfectly clear. 
Keep not guilt and 
guiltlessness APART, for your belief that you can HAVE THEM 
BOTH, is meaningless. 
All you have done by keeping them apart is 
LOSE THEIR MEANING, by confusing them with each other. 
And 
so you do not realize that only one means ANYTHING, and the 
other is wholly without sense of ANY kind. 


T 14 c 5. 
You have interpreted the separation as a means which you 
have made for BREAKING your communication with your Father. 

The Holy Spirit re-interprets it as a means of re-establishing what 
has NOT been broken, but HAS been made obscure. 
All things you 
made have use to Him, for His most holy purpose. 
He KNOWS you 
are not separate from God, but He perceives much in your mind 
that lets you THINK you are. 
All this, and nothing else, would He 
separate FROM you. 
The power of decision, which you made IN 
PLACE of power of creation. 
He would teach you how to use ON 
YOUR BEHALF. 
You who made it to crucify yourselves, must learn 
of Him how to apply it to the holy cause of restoration. 


T 14 C 6. 
You who speak in dark and devious symbols, do not under¬ 
stand the language you have made. 
It HAS no meaning, for its pur¬ 
pose is NOT communication, but rather, the DISRUPTION of com¬ 
munication. 
If the purpose of language IS communication, how can 
this tongue mean ANYTHING? Yet even this strange and twisted 
effort to communicate through NOT communicating, holds enough 
of love to MAKE IT MEANINGFUL, IF ITS INTERPRETER IS NOT 
ITS MAKER. 
You who made it are but expressing CONFLICT, from 
which the Holy Spirit would RELEASE you. 
Leave what you would 


503 


1-493 


Volume I Text 


communicate to Him. 
He will interpret it to you with perfect clarity, 
for He knows with Whom you ARE in perfect communication. 


T 14 C 7. 
You know not what you say, and so you know not what is 
said to you. 
But your Interpreter perceives the meaning in your 
alien language. 
He will not attempt to communicate the meaning¬ 
less. 
But He WILL separate out all that HAS meaning, dropping off 
all the rest, and offering your true communication to those T(546) - 373 
- who would communicate as truly WITH you. 
YOU SPEAK TWO 
LANGUAGES AT ONCE, and this MUST lead to unintelligibility. 

But if one means nothing, and the other EVERYTHING, only that 
one is possible for purposes of communication. 
The other but IN¬ 
TERFERES with it. 


T 14 c 8. 
The Holy Spirit's function is ENTIRELY communication. 
He 
therefore MUST remove whatever INTERFERES with it, in order to 
RESTORE it. 
Therefore, keep no source of interference from His 
sight, for He will NOT attack your sentinels. 
But bring them TO 
Him, and let His gentleness teach you that, in the light, they are not 
fearful, and CANNOT serve to guard the dark doors behind which 
nothing at all is carefully concealed. 
We must open all doors, and let 
the light come streaming through. 
There are no hidden chambers in 
God's Temple. 
Its gates are open wide, to greet His Son. 
No-one can 
fail to come where God has called him, if he close not the door him¬ 
self upon His Father's welcome. 
T(547) - 374 - 547 

T 14 D, Perception without Deceit (Notes 1215 9:52) 

T 14 D l. 
WHAT DO YOU WANT? Light or darkness, knowledge or 
ignorance are yours, but not both. 
Opposites must be brought to¬ 
gether, and not kept apart. 
For their separation is only in your mind, 
and they are reconciled by union, as YOU are. 
In union, everything 
that is not real MUST disappear, for truth IS union. 
As darkness dis¬ 
appears in light, so ignorance fades away when knowledge dawns. 

Perception is the medium by which ignorance is BROUGHT to 
knowledge. 
But the perception must be without deceit, for other- 


547 November 23, 1966. 



1-494 


504 



Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


wise, it becomes the messenger of ignorance, rather than a helper in 
the search for truth. 


T 14 D 2. 
The search for truth is but the honest searching out of every¬ 
thing that INTERFERES with truth. 
TRUTH IS. 
And can be neither 
lost, nor sought, nor found. 
It is there, wherever YOU are, being 
WITHIN you. 
But it CAN be recognized or unrecognized, real or 
false, to YOU. 
If you hide it, it becomes unreal to you, BECAUSE 
you hid it, and SURROUNDED IT WITH FEAR. 
Under each corner¬ 
stone of fear, on which you have erected your insane system of be¬ 
lief, THE TRUTH LIES HIDDEN. 
Yet you cannot know this, for, by 
HIDING truth in fear, you see no reason to believe the more you 
LOOK at fear, the LESS you see it, and the clearer WHAT IT CON¬ 
CEALS becomes. 


T 14 D 3. 
It is not possible to convince the unknowing that they know. 

From their point of view, IT IS NOT TRUE. 
Yet it IS true, because 
GOD knows it. 
These are clearly opposite viewpoints of what the 
"unknowing" ARE. 
To God, unknowing is impossible. 
It is therefore 
not a point of view at all, but merely a belief in something that does 
not exist. 
It is only this BELIEF that the unknowing have, and BY it, 
they are wrong about themselves. 
They have DEFINED themselves 
as they were NOT created. 
Their creation was NOT a point of view, 
but rather, a CERTAINTY. 
Uncertainty BROUGHT to certainty does 
not retain ANY conviction of reality. 


T 14 D 4. 
You must have noticed that the emphasis has been on bring¬ 
ing what is undesirable TO the desirable, what you do NOT want to 
what you DO. 
You will realize T(548) - 375 - that salvation MUST come 
to you this way, if you consider what dissociation IS. 
Dissociation is 
a distorted process of thinking, whereby two systems of belief, 
which CANNOT coexist, are BOTH MAINTAINED. 
It HAS BEEN 
recognized that, if they were BROUGHT TOGETHER, their joint ac¬ 
ceptance WOULD become impossible. 
But, if one is kept in darkness 
FROM THE OTHER, their SEPARATION seems to keep them both 
alive, and equal in their reality. 
Their JOINING thus becomes the 


505 


1-495 


Volume I Text 


source of fear, for, if they meet, acceptance MUST be withdrawn 
from one of them. 


T 14 D 5. 
You CANNOT have them both, for each DENIES the other. 

Apart, this fact is lost from sight, for each, in a SEPARATE place, 
CAN be endowed with firm belief. 
BRING THEM TOGETHER, and 
the fact of their complete incompatibility is instantly apparent. 
One 
WILL go, BECAUSE the other is seen in the SAME place. 
Light can¬ 
not enter darkness, when a mind BELIEVES in darkness, and will 
not let it go. 
Truth does not struggle AGAINST ignorance, and love 
does not ATTACK fear. 
What needs no protection, does not defend 
itself. 
Defense was of YOUR making. 
God knows it not. 


T 14 D 6. 
The Holy Spirit uses defenses ON BEHALF of truth, only 
because you made them AGAINST it. 
His perception of them, ac¬ 
cording to HIS purpose, merely changes them into a CALL FOR 
what you have ATTACKED WITH them. 
Defenses, like everything 
you made, must be gently turned to your own good, translated by 
Him from means of self-destruction, to means of preservation and 
release. 
His task is mighty, but the power of God is with Him. 

Therefore, to Him, it is so easy, that it was accomplished the instant 
it was given Him for you. 


T 14 D 7. 
Do not delay yourselves in your return to peace, by wonder¬ 
ing how He can fulfill what God has given Him to do. 
Leave that to 
Him Who knows! You are not asked to do mighty tasks yourself. 

You are merely asked to do the little He SUGGESTS you do, trusting 
Him only to the small extent of believing that, if He asks it, you can 
do it. 
You will SEE how easily ALL that He asks can be T(549) - 376 - 
accomplished. 
He asks of you but this; - bring to Him every secret 
you have locked away from Him. 
Open every door to Him, and bid 
Him enter the darkness, and lighten it away. 


T 14 D 8. 
At YOUR request. 
He enters gladly. 
He brings the light to 
darkness, if you make the darkness OPEN to Him. 
But what you 
hide. 
He cannot look upon. 
For He sees FOR YOU, and unless you 
look WITH Him, He CANNOT see. 
The vision of Christ is not for 
Him alone, but for Him WITH YOU. 
Bring, therefore, all your dark 


1-496 


506 


Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


and secret thoughts to Him, and look upon them WITH Him. 
He 
holds the light, and you the darkness. 
They CANNOT coexist, when 
both of you TOGETHER look on them. 
His judgment MUST prevail, 
and He will GIVE it to you, as you join your perception to His. 
Join¬ 
ing with Him in seeing, is the way in which you learn to share with 
Him the interpretation of perception that leads to knowledge. 


T 14 D 9. 
You cannot see alone. 
Sharing perception with Him Whom 
God has given you, teaches you how to RECOGNIZE what you see. 

It is the recognition that NOTHING you see means ANYTHING 
alone. 
Seeing WITH Him will SHOW you that all meaning, IN¬ 
CLUDING YOURS, comes not from double vision, but from the 
gentle fusing of everything into one meaning, one emotion and one 
purpose. 
God has one Purpose, which He shares with you. 
The sin¬ 
gle vision, which the Holy Spirit offers you, will bring this Oneness 
to your mind with clarity and brightness so intense, you could not 
wish, for all the world, not to accept what God would have you 
have. 
Behold your will, accepting it as His, with all His love as 
yours. 
All honor to you through Him, and through Him unto 
God. 
548 

T 14 D to. 
In the darkness you have obscured the glory God gave you, 
and the power that He bestowed upon His guiltless Son. 
All that, 
lies hidden in every darkened place shrouded in guilt, and in the 
dark denial of innocence. 
Behind the dark T(550) - 377 - doors which 
you have closed lies nothing, BECAUSE nothing CAN obscure the 
gift of God. 
It is the CLOSING of the doors, that interferes with rec¬ 
ognition of the power of God that shines in you. 
Banish not power 


548 1 Timothy 6:16 Who alone has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light, whom no man has 
seen or can see, to whom be honor and everlasting power. 
Amen. 


Revelation 5:12-13 Saying with a loud voice: 

“Worthy is the Lamb who was slain 
To receive power and riches and wisdom, 

And strength and honor and glory and blessing!” 

And every creature which is in heaven and on the earth and under the earth and such as are in the sea, 
and all that are in them, I heard saying: 

“Blessing and honor and glory and power 
Be to Him who sits on the throne, 

And to the Lamb, forever and ever!” 


507 


1-497 



Volume I Text 


from your mind, but let all that would hide your glory, be brought 
to the judgment of the Holy Spirit, and there undone. 
Whom He 
would save for glory IS saved for it. 
He has promised the Father 
that, through Him, you would be released from littleness to glory. 


T 14 D ll. 
To what He promised God, He is wholly faithful, for He 
shared WITH God the promise that was given to Him to share with 
YOU. 
He shares it still, FOR YOU. 
Everything that promises other¬ 
wise, great or small, however much or little valued. 
He will replace 
with the one promise GIVEN unto Him to lay upon the altar to your 
Father and His Son. 
No altar stands to God WITHOUT His Son. 


And NOTHING brought there that is not equally worthy of BOTH, 
but will be REPLACED by gifts wholly acceptable to Father AND to 
Son. 
Can you offer guilt to God? You cannot, then, offer it to His 
Son. 
For they are NOT apart, and gifts to one ARE offered to the 
other. 


T 14 D 12. 
You know not God, because you know not this. 
And yet 
you DO know God, and ALSO this. 
All this is safe WITHIN you, 
where the Holy Spirit shines. 
He shines not in division, but in the 
meeting-place where God, UNITED with His Son, speaks to His Son 
THROUGH Him. 
Communication between what cannot BE divided 
CANNOT cease. 
The holy meeting-place of the unseparated Father 
and His Son lies in the Holy Spirit, and in YOU. 
All interference in 
the communication that God Himself wills with His Son is quite im¬ 
possible here. 
Unbroken and uninterrupted love flows constantly 
between the Father and the Son, as BOTH would have it be. 
And so 
it IS. 


T 14 D 13. 
Let your minds wander not through darkened corridors, 
AWAY from Light's center. 
You may choose to lead YOURSELVES 
astray, but you can only be BROUGHT TOGETHER by the Guide 
appointed FOR you. 
He will surely lead you to where God T(55l) - 378 
- and His Son await your recognition. 
They are joined in giving you 
the gift of Oneness, before which ALL separation vanishes. 
Unite 
with what you ARE. 
You CANNOT join with anything EXCEPT re¬ 
ality. 
God's glory and His Son's BELONG to you in truth. 
They 


1-498 


508 


Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


HAVE no opposite, and nothing else CAN you bestow upon your¬ 
selves. 


T 14 D 14. 
There is no substitute for truth. 
And truth will make this 
plain to you, as you are brought into the place where you must 
MEET with truth. 
And there you must be led, through gentle under¬ 
standing, which can lead you nowhere else. 
Where God is, there are 
YOU. 
Such IS the truth. 
Nothing can change the knowledge GIVEN 
you by God into UNknowing. 
Everything God created KNOWS its 
Creator. 
For this is how creation is accomplished, by the Creator, 
and by His creations. 
In the holy meeting-place are joined the Father 
and His creations, and the creations of His Son, with them together. 

T 14 D 15. 
There is one link which joins them all together, holding 
them in the Oneness out of which creation happens. 
The link with 
which the Father joins Himself to those He gives the power to create 
LIKE Him, can NEVER be dissolved. 
Heaven itself is union with 
ALL of creation, and with its One Creator. 
And Heaven remains the 
Will of God for YOU. 
Lay no gifts other than this upon your altars, 
for nothing can coexist BESIDE it. 
Here, your meager offerings are 
BROUGHT TOGETHER with the gift of God, and only what is wor¬ 
thy of the Father will be accepted by the Son, for whom it was in¬ 
tended. 
To whom God gives Himself, He IS given. 
Your little gifts 
will vanish, on the altar where He has placed His Own. 
T(552) - 379 - 549 

T 14 E. 
The Recognition of Holiness (Notes 1228 9:65) 

T 14 E l. 
The Atonement does not MAKE holy. 
You were CREATED 
holy. 
It merely brings UNholiness TO holiness, or what you MADE, 
to what you ARE. 
The bringing together of truth and illusion, OF 
THE EGO AND GOD, is the Holy Spirit's only function. 
Keep not 
your making from your Father, for hiding it has cost you knowledge 
of Him, and of yourselves. 
The knowledge is safe, but wherein is 
YOUR safety, APART from it? The making of time, to TAKE THE 
PLACE of timelessness, lay in the decision to BE NOT as you WERE. 

Thus, truth was made past, and the present was dedicated to illu- 


549 November 26, 1966. 



509 


1-499 



Volume I Text 


sion. 
And the past, too, was changed, and INTERPOSED between 
what ALWAYS was, and NOW. 
The past that YOU remember 
NEVER was, and represents only denial of what ALWAYS was. 


T 14 E 2. 
Bringing the ego to God, is but to bring error to truth, where 
it stands corrected, because it is the OPPOSITE of what it meets, and 
is undone because the CONTRADICTION can no longer stand. 


How long can contradiction stand, when its impossible nature is 
clearly revealed? What disappears in light is NOT attacked. 
It 
merely vanishes, because it is not true. 
Different realities ARE mean¬ 
ingless, for reality MUST be one. 
It CANNOT change with time, or 
mood, or chance. 
Its changelessness is WHAT MAKES IT REAL. 


This CANNOT be undone. 
Undoing is for UNreality. 
And this, real¬ 
ity WILL do for you. 


T 14 E 3. 
Merely by BEING WHAT IT IS, does truth release you from 
everything that it is NOT. 
The Atonement is so gentle, you need but 
whisper to it, and all its power will rush to your assistance and sup¬ 
port. 
You are not frail, with God beside you. 
But WITHOUT Him, 
you are nothing. 
The Atonement OFFERS YOU GOD. 
The gift 
which you refused, is held by Him in you. 
His Spirit holds it there 
FOR you. 
God has not left His altar, though His worshippers placed 
other gods upon it. 
The temple still is holy, for the Presence that 
dwells within it IS Holiness. 


T 14 E 4. 
In the temple, holiness waits quietly for the return of them 
that love it. 
For the Presence knows they will return to purity and to 
grace. 
The graciousness of God will take them gently in, and cover 
all their sense of pain and loss, with the immortal assurance of their 
Father's Love. 
There, fear of death will be T(553) - 380 - replaced with 
joy of living. 
For God is Life, and they abide IN Life. 
Life is as holy 
as the Holiness by which it was created. 
The Presence of Holiness 
lives in everything that lives, for Holiness CREATED life, and leaves 
not what it created holy as Itself. 


T 14 E 5. 
In the world you, can become a spotless mirror, in which the 
holiness of your Creator shines forth from you, to all around you. 

You can REFLECT HEAVEN here. 
But no reflections of the images 


1-500 


510 


Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


of other gods must dim the mirror that would hold God's reflection 
in it. 
Earth can reflect Heaven or hell; God or the ego. 
You need but 
leave the mirror clean, and clear of all the images of hidden dark¬ 
ness you have drawn upon it. 
God will shine upon it of Himself. 

Only the clear reflection OF Himself can BE perceived upon it. 
Re¬ 
flections are seen in light. 
In darkness, they are obscure, and their 
meaning seems to lie only in shifting interpretations, rather than in 
themselves. 


T 14 E 6. 
The reflection of God NEEDS no interpretation. 
IT IS 
CLEAR. 
Clear but the mirror, and the message which shines forth 
from what the mirror holds out for everyone to see, NO-ONE will 
fail to understand. 
It is the message that the Holy Spirit is holding to 
the mirror that is in HIM. 
He recognizes it, because he has been 
taught his NEED for it, but knows not where to look to FIND it. 
Let 
him, then, see it in YOU, and share it WITH you. 
Could you but re¬ 
alize, for a single instant, the power of healing that the reflection of 
God, shining in YOU, can bring to all the world, you COULD not 
wait to make the mirror of your mind clean, to receive the image of 
the Holiness that heals the world. 


T 14 E 7. 
The image of holiness that shines in YOUR mind is NOT ob¬ 
scure, and will NOT change. 
Its meaning, to those who look upon it 
is not obscure, for everyone perceives it AS THE SAME. 
All bring 
their DIFFERENT problems to its healing light, but ALL their prob¬ 
lems are met ONLY with healing there. 
The response of holiness, to 
ANY form of error, is ALWAYS the same. 
There is no contradiction 
in what holiness CALLS FORTH. 
Its ONE response is healing, with¬ 
out ANY regard for what is brought TO it. 
T(554) - 381 - 

T 14 E 8. 
Those who have learned to offer ONLY healing, because of 
the reflection of holiness in them, are ready at last for Heaven. 


There, holiness is not a reflection, but rather the ACTUAL CONDI¬ 
TION of what was but reflected TO them here. 
God is no image, and 


511 


1-501 


Volume I Text 


His creations, as part of Him, hold Him in them in truth. 
They do 
not merely REFLECT the truth, for THEY ARE truth. 
550 

T 14 F. 
The Shift to Miracles (Notes 1233 9:71) 

T 14 F l. 
When no perception stands between God and His Creation, 
or between His Children and their own, the knowledge of creation 
MUST continue forever. 
The reflections that you accept into the mir¬ 
ror of your minds in time, but bring eternity nearer or farther. 


T 14 F 2. 
But eternity ITSELF is beyond ALL time. 
Reach out of time 
and touch it, with the help of its reflection IN you, and you will turn 
FROM time to holiness, as surely as the reflection of holiness calls 
everyone to lay all guilt aside. 
Reflect the peace of Heaven HERE, 
and bring this world to Heaven. 
For the REFLECTION of truth 
draws everyone TO truth. 
And as they enter INTO it, they leave 
ALL reflections behind. 
In Heaven, reality is SHARED, and not re¬ 
flected. 
By sharing its reflection HERE, its truth becomes the only 
perception which the Son of God accepts. 
And thus, remembrance 
of His Father dawns on him, and he can no longer be satisfied with 
anything but his own reality. 


T 14 F 3. 
You on earth have no conception of limitlessness, for the 
world you seem to live in IS a world of limits. 
In this world, it is 
NOT true that anything without order of difficulty can occur. 
The 
miracle, therefore, has a unique function, and is motivated by a 
unique Teacher, Who brings the laws of another world to this one. 

The miracle is the one thing you can do that TRANSCENDS order, 
being based, NOT on differences, but on equality. 
Miracles are NOT 
in competition, and the number you can do is LIMITLESS. 
They can 
be simultaneous and legion. 
This is not difficult to understand, once 
you conceive of them as possible at all. 


T 14 F 4. 
What is more difficult to grasp is the lack of order of magni¬ 
tude, which stamps the miracle as something that MUST come from 
elsewhere, NOT from here. 
From the world's viewpoint, this is quite 
impossible. 
You have experienced T(555) - 382 - the lack of competition 


550 3 81 - [split paragraph] 


1-502 


512 




Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


among your thoughts, which, even though they may conflict, can 
occur to you together, and in great numbers. 
You are so used to this, 
that it can cause you little surprise. 
Yet you are also used to classify¬ 
ing some of your thoughts as more important, larger, or better, 
wiser, or more productive and valuable, than others. 
And this is true 
about the thoughts that cross the mind of those who think they live 
apart. 
For some are reflections of Heaven, while others are moti¬ 
vated by the ego, which but SEEMS to think. 


T 14 F 5. 
The result is a weaving, changing pattern that never rests, 
and is never still. 
It shifts unceasingly across the mirror of your 
mind, and the reflections of Heaven last but a moment, and grow 
dim, as darkness blots them out. 
Where there was light, darkness 
removes it in an instant, and alternating patterns of light and dark¬ 
ness, darkness and light, sweep constantly across your minds. 
The 
little sanity that still remains is held together by a sense of order 
which YOU establish. 
The very fact that you can DO this, and bring 
ANY order into chaos, shows you that you are NOT an ego, and that 
MORE than an ego MUST be in you. 
For the ego IS chaos, and if it 
were all of you, no order at all would be possible. 


T 14 F 6. 
But, though the order which you impose upon your minds 
limits the ego, IT ALSO LIMITS YOU. 
To order is to judge, and to 
arrange BY judgment. 
Therefore, it is NOT your function, but the 
Holy Spirit's. 
It will seem very difficult for you to learn that YOU 
HAVE NO BASIS AT ALL for ordering your thoughts. 
This lesson 
the Holy Spirit teaches, by giving you shining examples, to show 
you that your way of ordering is wrong, but that a better way is OF¬ 
FERED you. 
The miracle offers EXACTLY the same response to 
EVERY call for help. 
IT DOES NOT JUDGE THE CALL. 
It merely 
recognizes what it IS, and answers accordingly. 
It does NOT con¬ 
sider which call is louder, or greater, or more important. 


T 14 F 7. 
You may wonder how you, who are still bound to judgment, 
can be asked to do that which requires no judgment of your own. 

The answer is very simple. 
The power of God, and NOT of you, en¬ 
genders miracles. 
The miracle ITSELF is but T(556) - 383 - the witness 


513 


1-503 


Volume I Text 


that you HAVE the power of God in you. 
That is the reason that the 
miracle gives EQUAL blessing to ALL who share in it, and that is 
also why EVERYONE shares in it. 
The power of God IS limitless. 

And, being always maximal, it offers EVERYTHING to EVERY call 
from ANYONE. 
There is no order here. 
A call for help is GIVEN 
help. 
The only judgment involved at all is in the Holy Spirit's one 
division into two categories; one of love, and the other, the call for 
love. 


T 14 F 8. 
You cannot safely make this division, for you are much too 
confused, either to recognize love, or to believe that EVERYTHING 
else is nothing but a NEED for love. 
You are too bound to form, and 
NOT to content. 
What you CONSIDER content, is not content at all. 

It is merely form, and nothing else. 
For you do NOT respond to 
what a brother REALLY offers you, but only to the particular per¬ 
ception of his offering by which your EGO judges it. 
The ego is in¬ 
capable of understanding content, and is totally unconcerned with 
it. 
To the ego, if the form is acceptable, the content MUST be. 
Oth¬ 
erwise, it will attack the form. 


T 14 F 9. 
You who believe you understand something of the dynamics 
of the mind, let me assure you that you know NOTHING of it at all. 

For of yourselves, you COULD not know of it. 
The study of the ego 
is NOT the study of the mind. 
In fact, the ego enjoys the study of 
itself, and thoroughly approves the undertakings of the students 
who would analyze it, approving its importance. 
Yet they but study 
form, with meaningless content. 
For their teacher is senseless, 
though careful to conceal this fact behind a lot of words that sound 
impressive, but which lack ANY consistent sense when they are put 
together. 


T 14 F10. 
This is the characteristic of the ego's judgments. 
SEPA¬ 
RATELY, they seem to hold, but PUT THEM TOGETHER, and the 
system of thought which arises from JOINING them, is incoherent 
and utterly chaotic. 
For form is not enough for meaning, and the 
underlying LACK of content, makes a cohesive system impossible. 

SEPARATION therefore remains the ego's chosen condition. 
For no- 


1-504 


514 


Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


one ALONE can judge the ego truly. 
But when two or more JOIN 
TOGETHER in searching for truth, the ego can no longer defend its 
lack of content. 
551 The fact of union tells them it is not true. 
T(557) - 384 

T 14 F11. 
It is impossible to remember God in secret and alone. 
For 
remembering Him means you are NOT alone, and willing to re¬ 
member it. 
Take no thought FOR YOURSELF, for no thought you 
hold IS for yourself. 
If you would remember your Father, let the 
Holy Spirit order your thoughts, and give only the answer with 
which He answers you. 
Everyone seeks for love, as you do, 552 and 
knows it not, unless he joins WITH you in seeking it. 
If you under¬ 
take the search TOGETHER, you bring with you a light so powerful, 
that what you see is GIVEN meaning. 
The lonely journey fails, be¬ 
cause it has EXCLUDED what it would FIND. 


T 14 F12. 
As God communicates to the Holy Spirit in you, so does the 
Holy Spirit TRANSLATE His communications THROUGH you, so 
YOU can understand them. 
God has no secret communications, for 
everything of Him is perfectly open, and freely accessible to all, be¬ 
ing FOR all. 
Nothing lives in secret, and what you would hide from 
the Holy Spirit IS nothing. 
Every interpretation you would lay upon 
a brother is senseless. 
Let the Holy Spirit SHOW HIM TO YOU, and 
teach you both his love and NEED for love. 
Neither his mind, NOR 
YOURS, holds but these two orders of thought. 
The miracle is the 
recognition that this is true. 


T 14 F13. 
Where there is love, your brother MUST give it to you, be¬ 
cause of what it IS. 
But where there is NEED for love, YOU must 
give it, because of what YOU are. 
Long ago we said this course will 
teach you what you are, restoring to you your identity. 
And we 
have already learned that this identity is shared. 
THE MIRACLE 
BECOMES THE MEANS OF SHARING IT. 
By SUPPLYING your 
identity, WHEREVER it is NOT recognized, YOU will recognize it. 



551 Matthew 18:20 “For where two or three are gathered together in My name, I am there in the midst 
of them.” 

552 Deuteronomy 4:29 But from there you will seek the LORD your God, and you will find Him if you 
seek Him with all your heart and with all your soul. 



515 


1-505 



Volume I Text 


And God Himself, Who wills to be with His Son forever, will bless 
each recognition of His Son, with all the love He holds for him. 
Nor 
will the power of all His love be absent from any miracle you offer 
TO His Son. 
How, then, can there be ANY order of difficulty among 
them? T(558) - 385 - 553 

T 14 G. 
The Test of Truth (Notes 1242 9:79) 

T 14 G l. 
But the essential thing is learning that YOU DO NOT 
KNOW. 
Knowledge is power, and all power is of God. 
You who 
have tried to keep power for yourselves, have lost it. 
You still HAVE 
the power, but you have interposed so much between it and your 
AWARENESS of it, that you cannot use it. 
EVERYTHING you have 
taught yourselves has made your power more and more obscure to 
you. 
You know not WHAT it is, nor WHERE. 
You have made a 
SEMBLANCE of power, and a SHOW of strength, so pitiful that it 
MUST fail you. 
For power is not seeming strength, and truth is be¬ 
yond a semblance of any kind. 


T 14 G 2. 
Yet all that stands between you, and the power of God in 
you, is but your learning of the false, and your attempts to UNDO 
THE TRUE. 
Be willing, then, for ALL of it to be undone, and be glad 
that you are not bound to it forever. 
For you have taught yourselves 
HOW TO IMPRISON THE SON OF GOD, a lesson so unthinkable 
that only the insane, in deepest sleep, could even DREAM of it. 
Can 
God learn how NOT to be God? And can His Son, GIVEN all power 
BY Him, learn to be powerLESS? 554 What have you taught your¬ 
selves that you can possibly prefer to keep, in place of what you 
HAVE, and what you ARE? 

T 14 G 3. 
Atonement teaches you how to escape forever from every¬ 
thing that you have taught yourselves in the past, by showing you 
ONLY what you ARE NOW. 
Learning HAS BEEN accomplished, 
BEFORE its effects are manifest. 
Learning is therefore IN THE PAST, 


553 December 5, 1966. 


554 Matthew 28:18 And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, “All authority has been given to Me in 
heaven and on earth.” 


1-506 


516 



Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


but its influence DETERMINES the present, by giving it whatever 
meaning it holds for you. 
Your learning gives the present NO 
MEANING AT ALL. 
Nothing you have ever learned can help you 
understand the present, or teach you how to undo the past. 
Your 
past IS what you have taught yourselves. 


T 14 G 4. 
LET IT ALL GO. 
Do NOT attempt to understand ANY 
event, or ANYTHING, or ANYONE in its light, for the light of 
darkness, by which you TRY to see, can ONLY obscure. 
Put no con¬ 
fidence at all in darkness to illuminate your T(559) - 386 - understand¬ 
ing, for if you do, you CONTRADICT the light, and thereby THINK 
you see the darkness. 
Yet darkness cannot BE seen, for it is nothing 
more than a condition in which seeing becomes impossible. 
You 
who have not yet brought ALL of the darkness you have taught 
yourselves unto the light in you, can hardly judge the truth and 
value of this course. 
Yet God did not abandon you. 
And so you have 
another lesson, sent from Him, ALREADY learned for every Child 
of Light, 555 by Him to Whom God gave it. 


T 14 G 5. 
This lesson shines with God's glory, for in it lies His power, 
which He shares so gladly with His Son. 
Learn of His happiness, 
which is yours. 
But to accomplish this, all your dark lessons MUST 
be brought willingly to truth, and joyously laid down, by hands 
open to receive, not closed to take. 
Every dark lesson that you bring 
to Him Who teaches light. 
He will accept LROM you, BECAUSE 
YOU DO NOT WANT IT. 
And He will gladly EXCHANGE each 
one for the bright lesson He has learned FOR you. 
Never believe 
that ANY lesson you have learned, APART from Him, means ANY¬ 
THING. 


T 14 G 6. 
You have one test, as sure as God, by which to recognize if 
what you learned is true. 
If you are WHOLLY free of fear of any 
kind, and if all those who meet, or even THINK of you, SHARE in 
your perfect peace, then you can be sure that you have learned 


555 Matthew 5:14 “You are the light of the world. 
A city that is set on a hill cannot be hidden." 
John 8:12 Then Jesus spoke to them again, saying, “I am the light of the world. 
He who follows Me 
shall not walk in darkness, but have the light of life.” 


517 


1-507 



Volume I Text 


GOD's lesson, and NOT yours. 
Unless all this is true, there ARE 
dark lessons in your minds, which hurt and hinder you, AND EVE¬ 
RYONE AROUND YOU. 
The ABSENCE of PERFECT peace means 
but ONE thing; you THINK you do not will for God's Son what His 
Father wills for him. 
Every dark lesson teaches this, on one form or 
another. 
And each bright lesson, with which the Holy Spirit will 
REPLACE the dark ones you do NOT accept and hide, teaches you 
that you will WITH the Father unto His Son. 


T 14 G 7. 
Do not be concerned how you can learn a lesson so COM¬ 
PLETELY different from everything you have taught yourselves. 

How would you know? Your part is very simple. 
You need only 
recognize that everything YOU learned you DO NOT WANT. 
Ask 
to BE taught, and do NOT use your experiences to confirm what 
YOU have learned. 
When your peace is threatened, or disturbed in 
T(560) - 387 - ANY way, say to yourself, "I do not know what any¬ 
thing, INCLUDING THIS, means. 
And so I do NOT know HOW TO 
RESPOND TO IT. 
And I will not use my own past learning as the 
light to guide me now." By this refusal to attempt to teach yourself 
what you do not know, the Guide Whom God has given you, will 
speak to you. 
HE will take His rightful place in your awareness, the 
instant YOU abandon it, and offer it to Him. 


T 14 G 8. 
YOU cannot be your guide to miracles, for it is you who 
made them necessary. 
And, because you did, the means on which 
you can DEPEND for miracles, has been provided FOR you. 
God's 
Son can make no needs His Father will not meet, if he but turn to 
Him ever so little. 
556 Yet He cannot COMPEL His Son to turn to 
Him, and remain Himself. 
It is impossible that God lose His iden¬ 
tity, for if He did, YOU WOULD LOSE YOURS. 
And BEING yours. 

He cannot change Himself, for your identity IS changeless. 
The 
miracle ACKNOWLEDGES His changelessness, by seeing His Son 


556 Matthew 6:8 “Therefore do not be like them. 
For your Father knows the things you have need of 
before you ask Him.” 

Matthew 6:32 “For after all these things the Gentiles seek. 
For your heavenly Father knows that you 
need all these things.” 


1-508 


518 



Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


as he always was, and NOT as he would make himself. 
The miracle 
brings the effect which ONLY guiltlessness CAN bring, and thus 
establishes the fact that guiltlessness MUST BE. 


T 14 G 9. 
How can you, so firmly bound to guilt and committed so to 
remain, establish FOR YOURSELF your guiltlessness? This is im¬ 
possible. 
But be sure that you are willing to acknowledge that it IS 
impossible. 
It is only because you think that you can run some little 
part, or deal with certain aspects of your lives alone, that the guid¬ 
ance of the Holy Spirit is limited. 
Thus would you make HIM unde¬ 
pendable, and USE this fancied undependability as an excuse for 
keeping certain dark lessons FROM Him. 
And, by so limiting the 
guidance that you would ACCEPT, YOU are unable to DEPEND on 
miracles, to answer ALL your problems FOR you. 


T 14 G10. 
Do you think that what the Holy Spirit would have you 
GIVE, He would withhold from YOU? You have NO problems 
which He cannot solve, by offering YOU a miracle. 
Miracles are for 
YOU. 
And EVERY fear or pain or trial you have HAS BEEN un¬ 
done. 
HE has brought ALL of them to light, having T(561) - 388 - AC¬ 
CEPTED them INSTEAD of you, and recognized that they never 
were. 
There ARE no dark lessons He has not ALREADY lightened 
FOR you. 
The lessons you would teach yourselves. 
He has corrected 
already. 
They do not exist in His Mind at all. 
For the past binds HIM 
not, and therefore binds not you. 


T 14 G11 . 
He does not see time as you do. 
And each miracle He offers 
you, CORRECTS your use of time, and makes it His. 
He Who has 
freed you from the past, would teach you, you ARE free of it. 
He 
would but have you accept His accomplishments AS YOURS, be¬ 
cause He did them FOR you. 
And because He did, they ARE yours. 

He has MADE you free of what you made. 
You can deny Him, but 
you CANNOT call upon Him in vain. 
He ALWAYS gives what HE 
has made, IN PLACE of you. 
He would establish His bright teach¬ 
ing so firmly in your mind, that no dark lessons of guilt can abide in 
what He has established as holy by His Presence. 



519 


1-509 


Volume I Text 


T 14 G 12. 
Thank God that He is there, and works through you. 
And 
all His works are yours. 
He offers YOU a miracle, with every one 
you LET Him do through you. 
God's Son will ALWAYS be indivisi¬ 
ble. 
As we are held as one in God, so do we learn as one in Him. 

God's Teacher is as like to His Creator as is His Son, and through 
His Teacher does God proclaim His Oneness AND His Son's. 
Listen 
in silence, and do NOT raise your voice against Him. 
For He teaches 
the miracle of Oneness, and before HIS lesson, division disappears. 

Teach LIKE Him here, and you WILL remember that you have AL¬ 
WAYS created like your Father. 
The miracle of creation has never 
ceased, having the holy stamp of immortality upon it. 
This is the 
Will of God for all creation, and all creation joins in willing this. 


T 14 G 13. 
Those who remember always that THEY know nothing, but 
who have become willing to learn EVERYTHING, will learn it. 
But 
whenever they trust THEMSELVES, they will NOT learn. 
They have 
destroyed their motivation for learning, BY THINKING THEY AL¬ 
READY KNOW. 
Think not you understand ANYTHING, until you 
pass the test of perfect peace, for peace and understanding GO TO¬ 
GETHER, and never can be found alone. 
Each brings the other 
WITH it, for T(562) - 389 - it is the law of God that they be not separate. 

They are cause and effect, each to the other, so, where one is absent, 
the other CANNOT be. 


T 14 G14. 
Only those who see they CANNOT know, UNLESS the ef¬ 
fects of understanding are with them, can really learn at all. 
And for 
this, IT MUST BE PEACE THEY WANT, and nothing else. 
When¬ 
ever you think YOU know, peace will depart from you, because you 
have abandoned the Teacher of Peace. 
Whenever you fully realize 
that YOU KNOW NOT, peace will return, for you will have invited 
Him to do so, by abandoning the ego on behalf of Him. 
Call not 
upon the ego for ANYTHING. 
It is only that, that you need do. 
The 
Holy Spirit will, OF HIMSELF, fill every mind that so makes room 
for Him. 
If you want peace, you MUST abandon the teacher of at¬ 
tack. 



1-510 


520 


Chapter 14 - Bringing Illusions to Truth 


T 14 G15. 
The Teacher of Peace can NEVER abandon YOU. 
YOU can 
desert HIM, but He will never reciprocate. 
For His faith in you IS 
His understanding. 
It is as firm as is His faith in His Creator, and He 
knows that faith in His Creator MUST encompass faith in creation. 


In this consistency, lies His holiness, which He CANNOT abandon, 
for it is not His Will to do so. 
With your perfection ever in His sight. 

He gives the gift of peace to everyone who perceives the NEED for 
peace, and who would have it. 
Make way for peace, and it will 
come. 
For understanding IS in you, and from it, peace MUST come. 


T 14 G16. 
The power of God, from which they both arise, is yours as 
surely as it is His. 
You think you know Him not, only because, 
alone, it is impossible to know Him. 
But see the mighty works that 
He will do through you, and you MUST be convinced you did them 
through Him. 
It is impossible to deny the Source of effects so power¬ 
ful, they COULD not be of you. 
Leave room for Him, and you will 
find yourself so filled with power, that NOTHING will prevail 
against your peace. 
And this will be the test by which you recognize 
that you HAVE understood. 
T(563) - 390 - 557 


557 December 7, 1966 


521 


1-511 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 

T 15 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1253 9:90) 

T 15 A1 . 
Can you imagine what it means to have no cares, no worries, 
no anxieties, but merely to be perfectly calm and quiet all the time? 
Yet that is what time is for; to learn just that, and nothing more. 

God's Teacher cannot be satisfied with His teaching, until it consti¬ 
tutes ALL your learning. 
He has not fulfilled His teaching function 
until you have become such consistent learners THAT YOU LEARN 
ONLY OF HIM. 
When this has happened, you will no longer need a 
teacher, or time in which to learn. 


T 15 A 2. 
One of the sources of perceived discouragement from which 
you suffer, is your belief that THIS TAKES TIME, and that the re¬ 
sults of the Holy Spirit's teaching are far in the future. 
This is not so. 

For the Holy Spirit USES time in His OWN way, and is NOT bound 
to it. 
Time is His friend in teaching. 
It does not waste Him, as it does 
you. 
But all the waste that time seems to bring with it, is due but to 
your identification with the ego, who uses time to support ITS belief 
in destruction. 
The ego, like the Holy Spirit, uses time to convince 
you of the inevitability of the goal and end of learning. 
To the ego, 
the goal is death, which IS its end. 
But to the Holy Spirit, the goal is 
life, which HAS no end. 


T 15 B. 
The Uses of Time (Notes 1255 9:92) 

T 15 B l. 
The ego IS an ally of time, but NOT a friend. 
For it is as mis¬ 
trustful of death as it is of life, and what it wants for you, IT cannot 
tolerate. 
The ego wants YOU dead, but NOT itself. 
The outcome of 
its strange religion MUST therefore be the conviction that it can pur¬ 
sue you BEYOND the grave. 
And out of its unwillingness for you to 
find peace, even in the death it wants for you, it offers you immor¬ 
tality in hell. 
It speaks to you of Heaven, but assures you that 
Heaven is not for you. 
How can the guilty hope for Heaven? 

T 15 B 2. 
The belief in hell is inescapable to those who identify with 
the ego. 
Their nightmares and their fears are all associated with it. 



1-512 


522 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


The ego teaches that hell is IN THE FUTURE, for this is what ALL 
its teaching is directed to. 
T(564) -391 HELL IS ITS GOAL. 
For, al¬ 
though the ego aims at death and dissolution as an end, IT does not 
believe it. 
The goal of death, which it craves for you, leaves IT unsat¬ 
isfied. 
No-one who follows the ego's teaching is without the FEAR 
of death. 
If death were thought of merely as an end of pain, would it 
be FEARED? 

T 15 B 3. 
We have seen this strange paradox in the ego's thought- 
system before, but never so clearly as here. 
For the ego must SEEM 
to KEEP FEAR FROM YOU, to keep your allegiance. 
Yet it must 
ENGENDER fear, in order to maintain ITSELF. 
Again, the ego tries, 
and all too frequently succeeds, in doing both, but using dissocia¬ 
tion for holding its contradictory aims together, so that they SEEM 
to be reconciled. 
The ego teaches thus: Death is the end, as far as 
hope of Heaven goes. 
But, because you and ITSELF cannot be sepa¬ 
rated, and because it cannot conceive of its OWN death, it will pur¬ 
sue you still, BECAUSE YOUR GUILT IS ETERNAL. 


T 15 B 4. 
Such is the ego's version of immortality. 
And it is THIS the 
ego's version of time supports. 
The ego teaches that Heaven is here 
and now, because the FUTURE is hell. 
Even when it attacks so sav¬ 
agely that it tries to take the life of someone who hears it temporar¬ 
ily as the ONLY voice, it speaks of hell even to him. 
For it tells him 
hell is HERE, and bids him leap from hell into oblivion. 
The only 
time the ego allows anyone to look upon, with some amount of 
equanimity is the PAST. 
And even then, its only value is that it is no 
more. 


T 15 B 5. 
How bleak and despairing is the ego's use of time! And how 
TERRIFYING! For underneath its fanatical insistence that the past 
and future be the same, is hidden a far more insidious threat to 
peace. 
The ego does not advertise its final threat, for it would have 
its worshippers still believe that IT can offer the ESCAPE from it. 


But the belief in guilt MUST lead to the BELIEF IN HELL, and AL¬ 
WAYS DOES. 
The only way in which the ego allows the fear of hell 
to be experienced is to BRING HELL HERE, but ALWAYS as a fore- 


523 


1-513 


Volume I Text 


taste of the future. 
For no-one who considers himself as DESERV¬ 
ING hell, can believe that punishment will end in peace. 
T(565) -392 
T 15 B 6. 
The Holy Spirit teaches thus: There IS no hell. 
Hell is only 
what the ego has made OF THE PRESENT. 
The BELIEF in hell is 
what PREVENTS you from UNDERSTANDING the present, be¬ 
cause YOU ARE AFRAID OF IT. 
The Holy Spirit leads as steadily to 
Heaven, as the ego drives to hell. 
For the Holy Spirit, Who knows 
ONLY the present, uses it to UNDO the fear by which the ego 
would make the present useless. 
There is NO ESCAPE from fear, in 
the ego's use of time. 
For time, according to its teaching, is nothing 
but a teaching device for COMPOUNDING guilt, until it becomes 
all-encompassing, and demands vengeance forever. 


T 15 B 7. 
The Holy Spirit would undo ALL of this NOW. 
Fear is NOT 
of the present, but ONLY of the past and future, which do not exist. 

There is no fear in the present, when each instant stands clear and 
separated from the past, without its shadow reaching out into the 
future. 
Each instant is a clean, untarnished birth, in which the Son of 
God emerges FROM the past, into the present. 
And the present EX¬ 
TENDS FOREVER. 
It is so beautiful and so clean and free of guilt, 
that nothing but happiness is there. 
No darkness is remembered, 
and his immortality and joy are NOW. 


T 15 B 8. 
This lesson takes NO time. 
For what IS time, WITHOUT a 
past and future? It HAS taken time to misguide you so completely, 
but it takes no time at all to BE what you ARE. 
Begin to practice the 
Holy Spirit's USE of time, as a teaching aid to happiness and peace. 

Take this very instant, NOW, and think of it as ALL THERE IS of 
time. 
Nothing can reach you here, out of the past, and it is here that 
you are COMPLETELY absolved, COMPLETELY free, and 
WHOLLY without condemnation. 
From this holy instant, wherein 
holiness is born, you will go forth in time without fear, and with no 
sense of change WITH time. 
T(566) -393 

T 15 B 9. 
Time is inconceivable without change, and holiness does 
NOT change. 
Learn from this instant more than merely hell does not 
exist. 
IN THIS REDEEMING INSTANT LIES HEAVEN. 
And 


1-514 


524 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


Heaven will NOT change, for the birth into the holy present is SAL¬ 
VATION from change. 
And change is an illusion, taught by those 
who could not see themselves as guiltless. 
There is no change in 
Heaven, because THERE IS NO CHANGE IN GOD. 


T 15 B 10. 
In the holy instant, in which you see yourself as bright with 
freedom, you WILL remember God. 
For remembering Him IS to 
remember freedom. 
Whenever you are tempted to be dispirited by 
the thought of HOW LONG it would take to change your mind so 
completely, ask yourself, "How long is an instant?" Could you not 
give so SHORT a time to the Holy Spirit, for your Salvation? He asks 
no more, for He has no need of more. 
It takes far longer to teach you 
how to be willing to Give Him this, than for Him to use this tiny in¬ 
stant to offer you the whole of Heaven. 
In exchange for this instant. 

He stands ready to give you the remembrance of Eternity. 


T 15 B 11. 
You will never give this holy instant to the Holy Spirit on 
behalf of YOUR release, while you are unwilling to give it to your 
brothers on behalf of THEIRS. 
For the instant of holiness is 
SHARED, and CANNOT be yours alone. 
Remember, then, when 
you are tempted to attack a brother, that HIS instant of release is 
YOURS. 
Miracles ARE the instant of release you offer, and will RE¬ 
CEIVE. 
They attest to YOUR willingness to BE released, and to offer 
time to the Holy Spirit, for HIS use of it. 
How long is an instant? It is 
as short for your brothers, as it is for you. 
Practice GIVING this 
blessed instant of freedom to all who are ENSLAVED by time, and 
thus make time their friend FOR them. 


T 15 B 12. 
The Holy Spirit gives their blessed instant TO you, through 
your giving it. 
As you GIVE it. 
He offers it to YOU. 
Be not unwilling 
to give what you would receive of Him, for you join WITH Him in 
giving. 
In the crystal cleanness of the release you GIVE, is YOUR 
INSTANTANEOUS escape from guilt. 
You MUST be holy, if you 
OFFER holiness. 
How long is an instant? As long as it takes to T(567) 
-394 re-establish perfect sanity, perfect peace, and perfect love for 
everyone, for God, and for YOURSELF. 
As long as it takes to re¬ 
member immortality, and your immortal creations, who share it 


525 


1-515 


Volume I Text 


with you. 
As long as it takes to exchange hell for Heaven. 
Long 
enough to transcend ALL of the ego's making, and ascend unto 
your Father . 
558 

T 15 B 13. 
Time is your friend, if you leave it to the Holy Spirit to use. 

He needs but very little, to restore God's Whole power to you. 
He 
Who transcends time FOR you, understands what it is FOR. 
Holi¬ 
ness lies not in time, but in Eternity. 
There never WAS an instant in 
which God's Son could lose his purity. 
His changeless state is BE¬ 
YOND time, for his purity remains forever beyond attack, and 
without variability. 
Time stands still in his holiness, and changes 
not. 
And so it is no longer time at all. 
For, caught in the single in¬ 
stant of the eternal sanctity of God's creation, it is TRANSFORMED 
into forever. 


T 15 B 14. 
GIVE the eternal instant, that eternity may be remembered 
FOR you, in that shining instant of perfect release. 
Offer the miracle 
of the holy instant THROUGH the Holy Spirit, and leave His giving 
it to you to Him . 
559 

T 15 C. 
Time and Eternity (Notes 1264 9:101) 

T 15 C 1 . 
The Atonement is in time, but not FOR time. 
Being for YOU, 
it is for the eternal. 
What holds remembrance of God, CANNOT be 
bound by time. 
No more are you. 
For, unless GOD is bound, you 
CANNOT be. 
An instant, offered to the Holy Spirit, is offered to 
God on your behalf, and in that instant, you will awaken gently in 
Him. 


T 15 C 2. 
In the blessed instant, you will let go ALL your past learn¬ 
ing, and the Holy Spirit will quickly offer you the WHOLE lesson of 
peace. 
What can take time, when ALL the obstacles to learning it 
have been removed? Truth is so far beyond time, that ALL of it 
happens at once. 
For as it was created one, so its oneness depends 
not on time at all. 
Be not concerned with time, and fear not the in- 


558 John 20:17 Jesus said to her, “Do not cling to Me, for I have not yet ascended to My Father; but go 
to My brethren and say to them, “I am ascending to My Father and your Father, and to My God and 
your God.” 

559 394 [split paragraph] 


1-516 


526 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


stant of holiness which will remove ALL fear. 
For the instant of 
peace is eternal, BECAUSE it is wholly WITHOUT fear. 
It WILL 
come, being the lesson God gives you, through the Teacher HE has 
appointed, to translate time to eternity. 
T(568) - 395 - 

T 15 C 3. 
Blessed is God's Teacher, Whose joy it is to teach God's holy 
Son his holiness. 
His joy is not contained in time. 
His teaching is for 
you, BECAUSE His joy is yours. 
Through Him, YOU stand before 
God's altar, where He gently translated hell into Heaven. 
For it is 
only in Heaven that God would have you be. 
How long can it take, 
to be where God would have you? For you ARE where you have 
forever been, and will forever be . 
560 All that you have, you have for¬ 
ever. 
The blessed instant reaches out to ENCOMPASS time, as God 
extends Himself to encompass you. 


T 15 C 4. 
You who have spent days, hours, and even years, in chain¬ 
ing your brothers TO your egos, in an attempt to support it, and up¬ 
hold its WEAKNESS, do not perceive the Source of STRENGTH . 
561 
In the holy instant, you will unchain ALL of your brothers, and re¬ 
fuse to support either THEIR weakness, OR YOUR OWN. 
You do 
not realize how much you have MISUSED your brothers, by seeing 
them as sources of EGO support. 
As a result, they witness TO the 
ego in your perception, and SEEM to provide reasons for NOT let¬ 
ting it go. 
Yet they are far stronger, and MUCH more compelling 
witnesses for the Holy Spirit. 
And they support His STRENGTH. 


T 15 C 5. 
It is, therefore, your choice, whether they support the ego or 
the Holy Spirit IN YOU. 
And you will know which you have cho¬ 
sen, by THEIR reactions. 
A Son of God who has been released 
through the Holy Spirit in a brother, IF THE RELEASE IS COM¬ 
PLETE, is ALWAYS recognized. 
He cannot BE denied. 
As long as 
YOU remain uncertain, it can be ONLY because you have not given 
COMPLETE release. 
And, because of this, you have not yet given 


560 Hebrews 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever. 


561 2 Corinthians 12:9 And He said to me, "My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made 
perfect in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of 
Christ may rest upon me. 


Philippians 4:13 I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. 



527 


1-517 



Volume I Text 


one single instant COMPLETELY to the Holy Spirit. 
For, when you 
HAVE, you will be SURE you have. 
You will be sure, because the 
witness TO Him will speak so clearly OF Him, that you will hear, 
and UNDERSTAND. 


T 15 C 6. 
You WILL doubt, until you hear ONE witness whom you 
have WHOLLY released through the Holy Spirit. 
And then you will 
doubt no more. 
The holy instant has not yet happened to you. 
But it 
will, and you will recognize it, with perfect certainty. 
No gift of God 
is recognized in any other T(569) - 396 - way. 
You can practice the me¬ 
chanics of the holy instant, and will learn much from doing so. 
But 
its shining and glittering brilliance, which will literally blind you to 
this world by its OWN vision, you can NOT supply. 
And here it is, 
ALL in this instant, complete, accomplished, and GIVEN WHOLLY. 


T 15 C 7. 
Start NOW, to practice your little part in SEPARATING 
OUT the holy instant. 
You will receive very specific instructions, as 
you go along. 
To learn to separate out this single second, and begin 
to experience it as timeless, is to begin to experience yourself as 
NOT separate. 
Fear not that you will not be given help in this. 
God's 
Teacher, and His lesson will support your strength. 
It is only your 
weakness that will depart from you in this practice, for it is the prac¬ 
tice of the power of God in you. 
Use it but for one instant, and you 
will never deny it again. 
Who can deny the Presence of what the 
universe bows to, in appreciation and gladness? Before the recogni¬ 
tion of the universe, which witnesses to it, YOUR doubts MUST dis¬ 
appear. 
T(570) - 397 - 562 

T 15 D. 
Littleness versus Magnitude (Notes 1270 9:107) 

T 15 D l. 
Be not content with littleness, but be sure you understand 
what littleness is, and why you could never BE content with it. 
Lit¬ 
tleness is the offering you gave YOURSELF. 
You offered this in 
place of magnitude, AND ACCEPTED IT. 
Everything in this world 
is little, because it is a world made out of littleness, in the strange 
belief that littleness CAN content you. 
When you strive for anything 


562 December 10, 1966 


1-518 


528 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


in the world, WITH THE BELIEF THAT IT WILL BRING YOU 
PEACE, you are belittling yourself, and blinding yourself to glory. 

Littleness and glory are the choices open to your striving and your 
vigilance. 
You will ALWAYS choose one AT THE EXPENSE of the 
other. 


T 15 D 2. 
But what you do not realize, each time you choose, is that 
your choice is your evaluation OF YOURSELF. 
Choose littleness, 
and you will NOT have peace, for you will have judged yourself 
UNWORTHY of it. 
And whatever you offer as a substitute, is much 
too poor a gift to satisfy you. 
It is essential that you accept the fact, 
and accept it gladly, that there is NO form of littleness that can 
EVER content you. 
You are free to try as many as you wish, but all 
you will be doing is to delay your homecoming. 
For you will be con¬ 
tent ONLY in magnitude, which IS your home. 


T 15 D 3. 
There is a deep responsibility you owe yourself, and one 
which you must learn to remember ALL the time. 
The lesson will 
seem hard at first, but you will learn to love it, when you realize that 
it is true, and constitutes a tribute to your power. 
You who have 
sought AND FOUND littleness, remember this: Every decision that 
you make stems from WHAT YOU THINK YOU ARE, and repre¬ 
sents the value that you PUT upon yourself. 
Believe the little can 
content you, and, by LIMITING yourself, you will NOT be satisfied. 

For your function is NOT little, and it is only by finding your func¬ 
tion, and fulfilling it that you can ESCAPE from littleness. 


T 15 D 4. 
There is no doubt about what your function IS, for the Holy 
Spirit KNOWS what it is. 
There is no doubt about its magnitude, for 
it reaches you through Him, FROM Magnitude. 
You do not have to 
strive for it, because you HAVE it. 
All your striving must be di¬ 
rected AGAINST LITTLENESS, for it DOES T(57l) - 398 - 
require vigilance to protect your magnitude in this world. 
To hold 
your magnitude in perfect awareness, in a world of littleness, is a 
task the little cannot undertake. 
Yet it is asked of you, in tribute to 
your magnitude, and NOT your littleness. 
Nor is it asked of you 
alone. 



529 


1-519 


Volume I Text 


T 15 D 5. 
The power of God will support every effort you make on 
behalf of the magnitude of His dear Son. 
Search for the little, and 
you DENY yourself His power. 
God is not willing that His Son be 
content with less than everything. 
For He is not content without His 
Son, and His Son cannot be content with less than His Father has 
given him. 
We asked you once before, "Would you be hostage to the 
ego or host to God?" Let this question be asked you by the Holy 
Spirit in you, EVERY time you make a decision. 
For every decision 
you make DOES answer this, and invites sorrow or joy, accordingly. 


T 15 D 6. 
When God GAVE Himself to you in your creation. 
He ES¬ 
TABLISHED you as host to Him forever. 
He has NOT left you, and 
YOU have not left HIM. 
All your attempts to deny His magnitude, 
and make His Son hostage to the ego, CANNOT make little whom 
God has joined with Him. 
Every decision you make is made for 
Heaven or for hell, and will bring you AWARENESS of what you 
decided FOR. 
The Holy Spirit can hold your magnitude, clean of 
ALL littleness, clearly and in perfect safety in your minds, un¬ 
touched by every little gift the world of littleness would offer you. 

But for this, you cannot side AGAINST Him in what He wills for 
you. 


T 15 D 7. 
Decide for God through Him. 
For littleness, and the belief 
that you can be CONTENT with littleness, are the decisions YOU 
have made about yourself. 
The power and the glory that lie in you, 
from God, are for all who, like you, perceive themselves as little, 
and have deceived themselves into believing that littleness can be 
blown up, BY THEM, into a sense of magnitude that can content 
them . 
563 Neither GIVE littleness, nor ACCEPT it. 
All honor is due 
the host of God . 
564 Your littleness deceives you, but your magnitude 
is of Him Who dwells in you, and in Whom you dwell. 
Touch no- 


563 Matthew 6:13 “And do not lead us into temptation, 

But deliver us from the evil one. 


For Your s is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever.” Amen. 


564 1 Timothy 6:16 Who alone has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light, whom no man has 
seen or can see, to whom be honor and everlasting power. 
Amen. 



1-520 


530 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


one, then, with littleness, in the Name of Christ, eternal Host unto 
His Father. 
T(572) -399 565 

T 15 D 8. 
In this season, which celebrates the birth of holiness into this 
world, join with me who decided for holiness for YOU. 
It is our task 
TOGETHER to restore the awareness of magnitude, to the host 
whom God appointed for Himself. 
It is beyond ALL your littleness 
to give the gift of God, but NOT beyond YOU. 
For God would give 
Himself THROUGH you. 
He reaches from you to everyone, and be¬ 
yond everyone, to His Son's creations, but WITHOUT leaving you. 

Far beyond your little world, but still in you. 
He extends forever. 


Yet He brings all his extensions to you, as host to Him. 


T 15 D 9. 
Is it a sacrifice to leave littleness behind, and wander not in 
vain? It is not sacrifice to wake to glory. 
But it IS a sacrifice to accept 
anything LESS than glory. 
Learn that you MUST be worthy of the 
Prince of Peace, born in you, in honor of Him Whose host you are . 
566 
You know not what love means because you have sought to pur¬ 
chase it with little gifts, thus VALUING it too little to be able to un¬ 
derstand its magnitude. 
LOVE IS NOT LITTLE, and love dwells in 
you, for you are host to Him. 
Before the greatness that lives in you, 
your poor appreciation of yourself, and all the little offerings you 
have given, slip into nothingness. 


T 15 D 10. 
Holy Child of God, when will you learn that ONLY holi¬ 
ness can content you, and give you peace? Remember that you learn 
not for yourself alone, no more than I did. 
It is BECAUSE I learned 
for YOU, that you can learn of ME. 
I would but teach you what is 
yours, so that, together, we can replace the shabby littleness, that 
binds the host of God to guilt and weakness, with the glad aware¬ 
ness of the glory that is in him. 
My birth in you is your awakening 


565 December 12, 1966 

366 Isaiah 9:6 For unto us a Child is bom. 
Unto us a Son is given; And the government will be upon His 
shoulder. 
And His name will be called Wonderful, Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince 
of Peace. 



531 


1-521 



Volume I Text 


to grandeur. 
Welcome me not into a manger, but into the altar to 
holiness, where holiness abides in perfect peace. 
567 T(573) - 400 
T 15 D ll. 
My Kingdom is not of this world, because it is in YOU. 
568 
And YOU are of your Father. 
Let us join in honoring you, who 
MUST remain forever BEYOND littleness. 
Decide with me, who 
have decided to abide with you. 
569 1 will as my Father wills, know¬ 
ing His Will is constant, and at peace forever with Itself. 
You will be 
content with nothing BUT His Will. 
Accept no less, remembering 
that everything I learned is yours. 
What my Father loves, I love as 
Fie does, and I can no more accept it as what it is NOT, than Fie can. 

And no more can YOU. 


T 15 D 12. 
When you have learned to accept what you are, you will 
make no more gifts to offer to yourselves, for you will know you are 
COMPLETE, in need of nothing, and unable to accept ANYTFFING 
for yourself. 
But you will gladly give, FFAVING received. 
The host 
of God need not seek to find ANYTFFING. 
If you are wholly willing 
to leave Salvation to the plan of God, and UNwilling to attempt to 
grasp for peace YOURSELF, Salvation will be GIVEN you. 
But think 
not you can substitute YOUR plan for FFis. 
Rather, join with me in 
FFis, that we may release all those who would be bound, proclaim¬ 
ing together that the Son of God is host to FFim. 
570 

T 15 D 13. 
Thus will we let no-one forget what YOU would remember. 

And thus WILL you remember it. 
Call forth in everyone ONLY the 


567 Luke 2:7 And she brought forth her firstborn Son, and wrapped Him in swaddling cloths, and laid 
Him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn. 


568 John 18:36 Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. 
If My kingdom were of this world, 
My servants would fight, so that I should not be delivered to the Jews; but now My kingdom is not from 
here.” 

569 John 14:16 “And I will pray the Father, and He will give you another Helper, that He may abide 
with you forever.” 

John 15:4 “Abide in Me, and I in you. 
As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it abides in the 
vine, neither can you, unless you abide in Me.” 

John 15:10 “If you keep My commandments, you will abide in My love, just as I have kept My 
Father’s commandments and abide in His love.” 

: ' 70 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 

John 20:23 “If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you retain the sins of any, they 
are retained.” 


1-522 


532 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


remembrance of God, and of the Heaven that is in him. 
For where 
you would help your brother be, there will you think YOU are. 
Hear 
not his call for hell and littleness, but only his call for Heaven and 
greatness. 
Forget not that his call is yours, and answer him with me. 

God's power is forever on the side of His host, for it protects ONLY 
the peace in which He dwells. 
Lay not littleness before His holy al¬ 
tar, which rises above the stars, and reaches even to Heaven, be¬ 
cause of what is GIVEN it. 


T 15 E. 
Practicing the Holy Instant (Notes 1278 9:115) 

T 15 E l. 
This course is not beyond IMMEDIATE learning, unless you 
prefer to believe that WHAT GOD WILLS TAKES TIME. 
And this 
means ONLY that you would rather DELAY the recognition that 
His Will IS so. 
The holy instant is THIS T(574) -401 one, and EVERY 
one. 
The one you WANT it to be, it IS. 
The one you would NOT 
have it be, is lost to you. 
YOU must decide on WHEN it is. 
Delay it 
not. 
For beyond the past and future, in which you will NOT find it, 
it stands in shimmering readiness for your acceptance. 


T 15 E 2. 
Yet you cannot bring it into glad awareness while you do 
not want it, for it holds the whole RELEASE from littleness. 
Your 
practice MUST therefore rest upon your willingness to let all little¬ 
ness go. 
The instant in which magnitude will dawn upon you, is but 
as far away as your DESIRE for it. 
As long as you desire it not, and 
cherish littleness instead, by so much is it far from you. 
By so much 
as you want it, will you bring it nearer. 
Think not that you can find 
Salvation in your own way, and HAVE it. 


T 15 E 3. 
Give over EVERY plan that you have made for your Salva¬ 
tion, in exchange for God's. 
HIS will content you, for there IS noth¬ 
ing else that can bring you peace. 
For peace is of God, and of no-one 
beside Him. 
Be humble before Him, and yet great IN Him. 
And 
value NO plan of the ego, BEFORE the plan of God. 
For you leave 
your place in His plan, which you MUST fulfill if you would join 
with me, empty by your decision to join in any plan BUT His. 
I call 
you to fulfill your holy part in the plan that He has given to the 


533 


1-523 


Volume I Text 


world, for its release from littleness. 
God would have His host abide 
in perfect freedom. 


T 15 E 4. 
Every allegiance to a plan of Salvation that is APART from 
Him, diminishes the value of His Will for you in your own minds. 

And yet, it is your mind that IS the host to Him. 
Would you learn 
how perfect and immaculate is the holy altar on which your Father 
has placed HIMSELF? This you WILL recognize, in the holy instant 
in which you willingly and gladly give over EVERY plan but His. 

For there lies peace, PERFECTLY clear, because you have been will¬ 
ing to meet its conditions. 
T(575) - 402 - 

T 15 E 5. 
You can claim the holy instant ANY time and ANYWHERE 
you want it. 
In your practice, try to give over EVERY plan you have 
accepted, for finding magnitude in littleness. 
IT IS NOT THERE. 


USE the holy instant ONLY to recognize that you alone CANNOT 
know where it is, and can only DECEIVE yourself. 
I stand within 
the holy instant, as clear as you would have me. 
And the extent to 
which you learn to be willing to ACCEPT me, IS the measure of the 
time in which the holy instant will be yours. 
I call to you to make the 
holy instant yours AT ONCE, for the release from littleness in the 
mind of the host of God, depends on willingness, and NOT on time. 

T 15 E 6. 
The reason why this course is simple, is that TRUTH is sim¬ 
ple. 
Complexity is of the ego, and is nothing more than the ego's at¬ 
tempt to obscure the obvious. 
You could live forever in the holy in¬ 
stant, BEGINNING NOW and reaching to eternity, but for a very 
simple reason. 
Do not obscure the simplicity of this reason, for, if 
you do, it will be ONLY because you prefer NOT to recognize it, 
and NOT to let it go. 
The simple reason, stated simply as what it is, 
is this: The holy instant is a time in which you receive AND GIVE 
perfect communication. 
This means, however, that it is a time in 
which your mind is OPEN, both to receive AND give. 
It is the rec¬ 
ognition that all minds ARE in communication. 
It therefore seeks to 
CHANGE nothing, but merely to ACCEPT everything. 


T 15 E 7. 
How can you do this when you would prefer to have PRI¬ 
VATE thoughts, AND KEEP THEM? The ONLY way you COULD 


1-524 


534 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


do this, is to DENY the perfect communication that makes the holy 
instant WHAT IT IS. 
You BELIEVE that it is possible to harbor 
thoughts you would NOT share, and that Salvation lies in keeping 
your thoughts TO YOURSELF ALONE. 
For, in private thoughts, 
KNOWN ONLY TO YOURSELF, you think you find a way to keep 
what you would HAVE alone, and share what YOU would share. 

T(576) -403 And then you wonder why it is that you are not in full 
communication with those around you, and with God, Who sur¬ 
rounds ALL of you together. 


T 15 E 8. 
Every thought you would keep hidden shuts communica¬ 
tion off, BECAUSE YOU WOULD HAVE IT SO. 
It is impossible to 
RECOGNIZE perfect communication, while BREAKING communi¬ 
cation holds value to you. 
Ask yourselves honestly, "Would I 
WANT to have perfect communication, and am I WHOLLY willing 
to let EVERYTHING that INTERFERES WITH IT, go forever?" If the 
answer is "no," then the Holy Spirit's readiness to GIVE it to you, is 
not enough to make it yours, for you are NOT ready to share it 
WITH Him. 
And it cannot come into a mind that has decided to 
OPPOSE it. 
For the holy instant is given and received with EQUAL 
willingness, being the acceptance of the SINGLE Will that governs 
ALL thought. 


T 15 E 9. 
The necessary condition for the holy instant, does NOT re¬ 
quire that you have no thoughts that are not pure. 
But it DOES re¬ 
quire that you have none that you would KEEP. 
Innocence is not of 
your making. 
It is GIVEN you, the instant you would HAVE it. 
But 
it would not BE Atonement, if there were no NEED for Atonement. 

You will not be able to ACCEPT perfect communication, as long as 
you would HIDE it from yourself. 
For what you would hide IS hid¬ 
den. 
In your practice, then, try only to be vigilant AGAINST DE¬ 
CEPTION, and seek not to PROTECT the thoughts you would keep 
unto yourself. 
Let the Holy Spirit's purity shine them away, and 
bring ALL your awareness to the READINESS for purity He offers 


535 


1-525 


Volume I Text 


you. 
Thus will He make you ready to acknowledge that you ARE 
host to God, and hostage to no-one and to nothing. 
T(577) -404 571 

T 15 F. 
The Holy Instant and Special Relationships (Notes 
1287 9:124) 

T 15 F l. 
The holy instant is the Holy Spirit's most useful learning de¬ 
vice for teaching you love's meaning. 
For its purpose is to SUS¬ 
PEND JUDGMENT ENTIRELY. 
Judgment ALWAYS rests on the 
past, for PAST experience is the basis on which you judge. 
Judgment 
becomes impossible without the past, for WITHOUT it you do NOT 
understand anything. 
You would make no ATTEMPT to judge, be¬ 
cause it would be quite apparent to you that you do not know 
WHAT ANYTHING MEANS. 
You are afraid of this, because you 
believe that, WITHOUT THE EGO, all would be chaos. 
Yet I assure 
you that, without the ego, ALL WOULD BE LOVE. 


T 15 F 2. 
The past is the EGO's chief learning device, for it is in the 
past that you learned to define your OWN needs, and acquired 
methods for meeting them ON YOUR OWN TERMS. 
We said before 
that, to limit love to PART of the Sonship, is to bring guilt into your 
relationships, and thus MAKE THEM UNREAL. 
If you seek to sepa¬ 
rate out certain ASPECTS of the totality, and look TO THEM to meet 
your imagined needs, you are attempting to USE SEPARATION TO 
SAVE YOU. 
How, then, could guilt NOT enter? For separation IS 
the source of guilt, and to APPEAL to it for salvation IS TO BE¬ 
LIEVE YOU ARE ALONE. 


T 15 F 3. 
To be alone IS to be guilty. 
For to experience yourself AS 
alone, is to deny the Oneness of the Father and His Son, and thus to 
ATTACK REALITY. 
You cannot love PARTS of reality, and under¬ 
stand what love MEANS. 
If you would love UNlike to God, Who 
KNOWS no special love, how CAN you understand it? To believe 
that SPECIAL relationships, with SPECIAL love, can offer you sal¬ 
vation, IS the belief that separation is salvation. 
For it is the COM¬ 
PLETE EQUALITY of the Atonement, in which salvation lies. 
How 


571 December 14, 1966 


1-526 


536 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


can YOU decide that special aspects of the Sonship CAN GIVE YOU 
MORE THAN OTHERS? The past HAS taught you this. 
But the holy 
instant teaches you IT IS NOT SO. 
T(578) -405 
T 15 F 4. 
Because of guilt, ALL special relationships have some ele¬ 
ments of fear in them. 
And this is why they shift and change so fre¬ 
quently. 
They are NOT based on changeless love alone. 
And love, 
where fear has entered, CANNOT be depended on, because it is 
NOT perfect. 
572 In His function as Interpreter of what you have 
made, the Holy Spirit USES special relationships, which YOU have 
chosen to support the ego, as a learning experience which points to 
truth. 
Under His teaching, EVERY relationship becomes a lesson in 
love. 


T 15 F 5. 
The Holy Spirit knows NO-ONE IS SPECIAL. 
But He also 
perceives that you have MADE special relationships, which He 
would purify, and NOT let YOU destroy. 
However UNholy the rea¬ 
son why you made them may be. 
He can TRANSLATE them into 
holiness, by removing AS MUCH FEAR AS YOU WILL LET HIM. 


You can place ANY relationship under His care, and be sure that it 
will NOT result in pain, if you offer Him your willingness TO 
HAVE IT SERVE NO NEED BUT HIS. 
All the guilt in it arises from 
YOUR use of it. 
All the love, from His. 
Do not, then, be AFRAID to 
let your IMAGINED need, which would DESTROY the relationship, 
go. 
Your ONLY need IS His. 


T 15 F 6. 
Any relationship which you would SUBSTITUTE FOR AN¬ 
OTHER, has not been offered to the Holy Spirit, for His use. 
There 
IS no substitute for love. 
If you would attempt to substitute ONE 
aspect of love for ANOTHER, you have placed LESS value on one, 
and MORE on another. 
You have not only SEPARATED them, but 
have also JUDGED AGAINST BOTH. 
Yet you had judged against 
yourself FIRST, or you would never have imagined that you needed 
them AS THEY WERE NOT. 
Unless you had seen yourself as 


,71 1 John 4:18 There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear involves torment. 

But he who fears has not been made perfect in love. 



537 


1-527 



Volume I Text 


WITHOUT love, you COULD not have judged them to be LIKE you 
in lack. 


T 15 F 7. 
The ego's use of relationships is so fragmented, that it fre¬ 
quently goes even further; one PART of one aspect suits its pur¬ 
poses, while it prefers DIFFERENT parts of another. 
Thus does it 
ASSEMBLE reality to its own capricious liking, offering for YOUR 
seeking, a picture whose likeness DOES NOT EXIST. 
For there is 
nothing in Heaven OR earth that it resembles, T(579) -406 and so, 
however much you seek for its reality, you CANNOT find it, be¬ 
cause it is NOT real. 


T 15 F 8. 
Everyone on earth has formed special relationships, and, al¬ 
though this is not so in Heaven, the Holy Spirit knows how to bring 
a touch of Heaven to them here. 
In the holy instant, no-one is spe¬ 
cial, for your PERSONAL needs INTRUDE on no-one, to MAKE 
them different. 
Without the values from the past you WOULD see 
them all the same, and LIKE YOURSELF. 
Nor would you see ANY 
separation between yourself and them. 
In the holy instant, you see, 
in each relationship, what it WILL be, when you perceive ONLY the 
present. 


T 15 F 9. 
God knows you NOW. 
He remembers NOTHING, having 
ALWAYS known you exactly as He knows you now. 
The holy in¬ 
stant PARALLELS His knowing, by bringing ALL perception OUT 
of the past, thus removing the frame of reference you have built, by 
which to JUDGE your brothers. 
Once this is gone, the Holy Spirit 
substitutes His frame of reference FOR it. 
His frame of reference is 
simply God. 
The Holy Spirit's timelessness lies simply here. 
For in 
the holy instant, FREE of the past, you see that LOVE IS IN YOU, 
and you HAVE no need to look WITHOUT, and snatch it guiltily 
from where you THOUGHT it was. 


T 15 F10. 
ALL your relationships are blessed in the holy instant, BE¬ 
CAUSE THE BLESSING IS NOT LIMITED. 
In the holy instant, the 
Sonship gains AS ONE. 
And, UNITED in your blessing, it BE¬ 
COMES one TO YOU. 
The meaning of love is the meaning God 
GAVE to it. 
Give to it ANY meaning APART from His, and it is IM- 


1-528 


538 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


POSSIBLE to understand it. 
Every brother God loves as He loves 
you; neither less nor more. 
HE NEEDS THEM ALL EQUALLY, and 
so do YOU. 
In time, you have been told to offer miracles as Christ 
directs, and let the Holy Spirit bring to you those who are seeking 
you. 
But in the holy instant, you unite DIRECTLY with God, and 
ALL your brothers join in Christ. 
T(580) -407 

T 15 F 11. 
Those who are joined in Christ are in no way separate. 
For 
Christ is the Self the Sonship shares, as God shares His Self with 
Christ. 
Think you that you can judge the Self of God? God has cre¬ 
ated It BEYOND judgment, out of HIS need to extend His love. 
With 
Love in you, you HAVE no need EXCEPT TO EXTEND IT. 
In the 
holy instant, there is no conflict of needs, for there is ONLY ONE. 

For the holy instant reaches to eternity, and to the Mind of God. 


And it is only there that love HAS meaning, and ONLY there CAN 
it be understood. 


T 15 F12. 
It is impossible to use one relationship AT THE EXPENSE 
of another, and NOT suffer guilt. 
And it is equally impossible to 
condemn PART of a relationship and find peace WITHIN it. 
Under 
the Holy Spirit's teaching, ALL relationships are seen as TOTAL 
commitments, yet they do not conflict with one another in ANY 
way. 
Perfect faith in each one, for its ability to satisfy you COM¬ 
PLETELY, arises only from perfect faith in YOURSELF. 
And this 
you cannot have, while guilt remains. 
And there WILL be guilt, as 
long as you accept the possibility, AND CHERISH IT, that you can 
make a brother WHAT HE IS NOT, because YOU would have him 
so. 


T 15 F13. 
You have so little faith in yourself, because you are unwill¬ 
ing to accept the fact that perfect love is IN you. 
573 And so you seek 
WITHOUT for what you CANNOT find without. 
I offer you MY 
perfect faith in you, IN PLACE of all YOUR doubts. 
But forget not 
that my faith MUST be as perfect in ALL your brothers as it is in 


573 Luke 17:21 Nor will they say, “See here!' or “See there!' For indeed, the kingdom of God is within 
you.” 


539 


1-529 



Volume I Text 


you, or it would be a limited gift to YOU. 
In the holy instant, we 
SHARE our faith in God's Son, because we recognize, together, that 
he is wholly worthy OF it, and, in our appreciation of his worth, we 
CANNOT doubt his holiness. 
And so we love him. 
T(58l) -408 

T 15 G. 
The Holy Instant and the Laws of God (Notes 1295 
9:133) 

T 15 G l. 
All separation vanishes, as holiness is shared. 
For holiness is 
power, and by SHARING it, it GAINS in strength. 
If you seek for 
satisfaction in gratifying your needs as YOU perceive them, you 
MUST believe that strength comes from ANOTHER, and that 
WHAT YOU GAIN HE LOSES. 
Someone must ALWAYS lose, if 
you perceive yourself as weak. 
Yet there is another interpretation of 
relationships, that TRANSCENDS the concept of the LOSS of power 
completely. 


T 15 G 2. 
You do NOT find it difficult to believe that, when AN¬ 
OTHER calls on God for love, YOUR call remains as strong. 
Nor do 
you think that, by God's answer to HIM, YOUR hope of answer is 
diminished. 
On the contrary, you are far more inclined to regard 
HIS success, as witness to the possibility of YOURS. 
That is because 
you recognize, however dimly, that God is an IDEA, and so YOUR 
faith in Him is STRENGTHENED by sharing. 
What you find it diffi¬ 
cult to accept is the fact that, LIKE your Father, YOU are an idea. 

And like Him, YOU can give yourself COMPLETELY, wholly with¬ 
out loss, and ONLY WITH GAIN. 


T 15 G 3. 
Herein lies peace, for here there IS no conflict. 
In the world 
of scarcity, love HAS no meaning, and peace is impossible. 
For gain 
and loss are BOTH accepted, and so no-one is aware that perfect 
Love is IN him. 
In the holy instant, you recognize the IDEA of love 
in you, and UNITE this idea with the Mind that thought It, AND 
COULD NOT RELINQUISH IT. 
By HOLDING it within Itself, 
THERE WAS no loss. 
The holy instant thus becomes a lesson in how 
to hold ALL of your brothers in YOUR mind, experiencing not loss, 
but COMPLETION. 



1-530 


540 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


T 15 G 4. 
From this, it follows you can ONLY give. 
And this IS love, 
for this alone is natural, under the laws of God. 
In the holy instant, 
the laws of God prevail, and only THEY have meaning. 
The laws of 
this world cease to T(582) - 409 - hold any meaning at all. 
When the 
Son of God ACCEPTS the laws of God as what he gladly wills, it is 
impossible that he be bound, or limited in ANY way. 
In this instant, 
he IS as free as God would have him be. 
For, the instant that he re¬ 
fuses to BE bound, he is NOT bound. 


T 15 G 5. 
In the holy instant, nothing happens that has not always 
been. 
Only the veil, that has been drawn ACROSS reality, is lifted. 

Nothing has changed. 
But the AWARENESS of changelessness 
comes swiftly, as the veil of time is pushed aside. 
No-one who has 
not yet experienced the lifting of the veil, and felt himself drawn ir¬ 
resistibly into the Light behind it, can have faith in love WITHOUT 
fear. 
Yet the Holy Spirit GIVES you this faith, because He offered it 
to me and I ACCEPTED it. 


T 15 G 6. 
Fear not the holy instant will be denied you, for I denied IT 
not. 
And, through me, the Holy Spirit GAVE it unto you, as YOU 
will give it. 
Let no need that YOU perceive, obscure your need of 
THIS. 
For, in the holy instant, you will recognize the ONLY need the 
aspects of the Son of God share equally, and, BY this recognition, 
you will join with me in OFFERING what is needed. 
It is through 
US that peace will come. 
Join me in the IDEA of peace, for, in ideas, 
minds CAN communicate. 


T 15 G 7. 
If you would GIVE YOURSELF as your Father gives His 
Self, you will learn to understand Selfhood. 
And therein is love's 
meaning understood. 
But remember that understanding is OF THE 
MIND, and, ONLY of the mind. 
KNOWLEDGE is therefore of the 
mind, and its CONDITIONS are in the mind, WITH it. 
If you were 
not ONLY an idea, and NOTHING ELSE, you could not be in full 
communication with all that ever was. 
But, as long as you prefer to 
be something else, or would attempt to be NOTHING ELSE and 
SOMETHING ELSE together, the language of communication, 
WHICH YOU KNOW PERFECTLY, you will not remember. 



541 


1-531 


Volume I Text 


T 15 G 8. 
In the holy instant, God is remembered, and the language of 
communication with ALL your brothers, is remembered WITH 
Him. 
For communication T(583) - 410 - is remembered TOGETHER, as 
is truth. 
There is NO exclusion in the holy instant, because the past 
is gone, and, with it, goes the whole basis FOR exclusion. 
Without 
ITS source, exclusion vanishes. 
And this permits YOUR Source, and 
that of all your brothers, to REPLACE it in your awareness. 
God, 
and the power of God, will take their rightful place in you, and you 
will experience the full communication of ideas with ideas. 
Through 
your ability to do this, you will learn what you MUST be, because 
you will begin to understand what your Creator is, and what His 
creation is, along WITH Him. 
T(584) - 411 - 574 

T 15 H. 
The Holy Instant and Communication (Notes 1301 
9:138) 

T 15 H 1. 
Beyond the poor attraction of the special love relationship, 
and ALWAYS obscured by it, is the powerful attraction of the Father 
for His Son. 
There is no OTHER love that can satisfy you, because 
there IS no other love. 
This is the ONLY love that is fully given, 

AND FULLY RETURNED. 
Being complete, it asks nothing. 
Being 
wholly pure, everyone joined in it HAS everything. 
This is NOT the 
basis for ANY love relationship in which the ego enters. 
For EVERY 
relationship on which the ego embarks IS special. 
The ego estab¬ 
lishes relationships ONLY to GET something. 
And it would keep 
the giver BOUND TO ITSELF, through guilt. 


T 15 H 2. 
It is impossible for the ego to enter into any relationship 
without anger, for the ego believes that ANGER MAKES FRIENDS. 

This is NOT its statement, but it IS its purpose. 
For the ego REALLY 
BELIEVES that it can get, and KEEP, by MAKING GUILTY. 
This is 
its ONE attraction. 
An attraction so weak, that it would have no 
hold at all, except that NO-ONE RECOGNIZES IT. 
For the ego al¬ 
ways SEEMS to attract through love, and has no attraction at all to 
anyone who perceives that IT ATTRACTS THROUGH GUILT. 



574 December 16, 1966. 



1-532 


542 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


T 15 H 3. 
The sick attraction of guilt MUST be recognized FOR WHAT 
IT IS. 
For, having been made REAL to you, it is essential to look at it 
clearly, and, by withdrawing your INVESTMENT in it, to LEARN 
TO LET IT GO. 
No-one would choose to let go what he believes has 
value. 
Yet the attraction of guilt has value to you ONLY because you 
have NOT looked at what it IS, and have judged it as valuable 
COMPLETELY in the dark. 
As we bring it to light, your ONLY 
question will be why it was you EVER WANTED it. 
You have 
NOTHING to lose by looking open-eyed at this, for ugliness such as 
this belongs not in your holy mind. 
The host of God CAN have no 
REAL investment here. 
T(585) - 412 - 

T 15 H 4. 
We said before that the ego attempts to maintain and IN¬ 
CREASE guilt, but in such a way, that you do NOT recognize what 
it would do to YOU. 
For it is the ego's fundamental doctrine that, 
what you do to others, YOU HAVE ESCAPED. 
The ego wishes NO- 
ONE well. 
But its survival DEPENDS on your belief that YOU are 
exempt from its evil intentions. 
It counsels, therefore, that if you are 
HOST to it, IT will enable you to direct the anger that it holds out¬ 
ward, thus protecting YOU. 
And thus, it embarks on an endless, un¬ 
rewarding chain of special relationships, forged out of anger, and 
dedicated to but one insane belief; that the more anger you invest 
OUTSIDE yourself, the safer YOU become. 


T 15 H 5. 
It is this chain that binds the Son of God to guilt, and it is 
this chain the Holy Spirit would REMOVE from his holy mind. 
For 
the chain of savagery belongs not around the chosen host of God, 
who CANNOT make himself host to the ego. 
In the name of his re¬ 
lease, and in the Name of Him Who would release him, let us look 
more closely at the relationships that the ego contrives, and let the 
Holy Spirit judge them truly. 
For it is certain that, if you LOOK at 
them, you will offer them gladly TO Him. 
What HE can make of 
them you do NOT know, but you WILL become willing to find out, 
if you are willing, first, to perceive what YOU have made of them. 


T 15 H 6. 
In one way or another, every relationship which the ego 
makes is based on the idea that, by SACRIFICING itself, IT BE- 


543 


1-533 


Volume I Text 


COMES BIGGER. 
The "sacrifice," which it regards as purification, is 
actually the root of its bitter resentment. 
For it would much prefer to 
attack directly, and avoid delaying what it REALLY wants. 
Yet the 
ego acknowledges "reality" as it sees it, and recognizes that NO- 
ONE could interpret DIRECT attack as love. 
Yet to make guilty IS 
direct attack, but does not SEEM to be. 
For the guilty EXPECT at¬ 
tack, and, having ASKED for it, they are ATTRACTED to it. 


T 15 H 7. 
In these insane relationships, the attraction of what you do 
NOT want seems to be much stronger than the attraction of what 
you DO. 
For each one thinks T(586) - 413 - that he has SACRIFICED 
something to the other, AND HATES HIM FOR IT. 
Yet this is what 
he thinks he WANTS. 
He is NOT in love with the other at all; he 
merely believes he is IN LOVE WITH SACRIFICE. 
And FOR this 
sacrifice, which he demanded OF HIMSELF, HE demands the other 
ACCEPT the guilt, and SACRIFICE HIMSELF as well. 
Forgiveness 
becomes impossible, for the ego believes, that to forgive another, IS 
TO LOSE HIM. 
For it is only by attack WITHOUT forgiveness, that 
the ego can ensure the guilt which holds ALL its relationships to¬ 
gether. 


T 15 H 8. 
Yet they only SEEM to be together. 
For relationships, to the 
ego, mean ONLY that BODIES are together. 
It is always PHYSICAL 
closeness that the ego demands, and it does not object where the 
mind goes, or what it thinks, for this seems unimportant. 
For, as 
long as the BODY is there, to receive its sacrifice, it is content. 
To the 
ego, THE MIND IS PRIVATE, and only the body CAN be shared. 

Ideas are basically of no concern, except as they draw the BODY of 
another closer or farther. 
And it is in these terms that it evaluates 
ideas as "good" or "bad." What makes another guilty, AND HOLDS 
HIM THROUGH GUILT, is "good." What releases him FROM guilt 
is "bad," because he would no longer believe that BODIES commu¬ 
nicate, and so he would be "gone." 

T 15 H 9. 
Suffering and sacrifice are the gifts with which the ego 
would "bless" all unions. 
And those who are united at its altar AC¬ 
CEPT suffering and sacrifice as the PRICE of union. 
In their angry 


1-534 


544 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


alliances, born of the fear of loneliness, and yet dedicated to the 
CONTINUANCE of loneliness, they seek RELIEF from guilt, by IN¬ 
CREASING it in the other. 
For they believe that this DECREASES it 
in them. 
The other seems always to be attacking and wounding 
them, perhaps in little ways, perhaps "unconsciously," yet never 
without demand of sacrifice. 
The fury of those joined at the ego's 
altar, far exceeds your awareness of it. 
For what the ego really, 
wants you do NOT realize. 
T(587) - 414 - 

T 15 H 10. 
Whenever you are angry, you can be sure that you have 
formed a special relationship which the ego has "blessed," for anger 
IS its "blessing." Anger takes many forms, but it cannot long deceive 
those who will learn that LOVE BRINGS NO GUILT AT ALL, and 
what brings guilt CANNOT be love, and MUST be anger. 
ALL an¬ 
ger is nothing more than an attempt to MAKE SOMEONE FEEL 
GUILTY, and this attempt is the ONLY basis which the ego accepts 
for special relationships. 
Guilt is the only need the ego has, and, as 
long as you identify WITH it, guilt will remain ATTRACTIVE to 
you. 


T 15 H11. 
But remember this; to be WITH A BODY is NOT communi¬ 
cation. 
And, if you think it IS, you will feel guilty about COMMU¬ 
NICATION, and will be AFRAID to hear the Holy Spirit, recogniz¬ 
ing in His voice, your OWN need to communicate. 
The Holy Spirit 
CANNOT teach through fear. 
And how can He communicate with 
you, while you believe that, to communicate, is to MAKE YOUR¬ 
SELF ALONE? It is CLEARLY insane to believe that, by communi¬ 
cating, you will be abandoned. 
And yet, you DO believe it. 
For you 
think that your minds must be kept PRIVATE, or you will LOSE 
them. 
And, if your BODIES are together, your minds remain your 
own. 


T 15 H12. 
The union of bodies thus becomes the way in which you 
would KEEP MINDS APART. 
For bodies cannot forgive. 
They can 
do only as the mind directs. 
The illusion of the autonomy of the 
body, and ITS ability to overcome loneliness, is but the working of 
the ego's plan to establish its OWN autonomy. 
As long as you be- 


545 


1-535 


Volume I Text 


lieve that, to be with a body, is companionship, you will be COM¬ 
PELLED to attempt to keep your brother IN his body, HELD 
THERE BY GUILT. 
And you will see SAFETY IN GUILT, and 
DANGER IN COMMUNICATION. 
For the ego will ALWAYS teach 
that loneliness is solved by guilt, and that communication is the 
CAUSE of loneliness. 
And, despite the evident insanity of this les¬ 
son, YOU HAVE LEARNED IT. 


T 15 H 13. 
Forgiveness lies in communication, as surely as damnation 
lies in guilt. 
It is the Holy Spirit's teaching function to instruct those 
who T(588) - 415 - believe that communication is damnation, that 
communication is salvation. 
And He will do so, for the power of 
God in Him AND YOU is joined in REAL relationship, so holy and 
so strong, that it can overcome even this, WITHOUT fear. 
It is 
through the holy instant that what SEEMS impossible is ACCOM¬ 
PLISHED, making it evident that it is NOT impossible. 
In the holy 
instant, guilt holds NO attraction, since communication HAS BEEN 
restored. 
And guilt, whose ONLY purpose is to DISRUPT commu¬ 
nication, HAS no function here. 


T 15 I. 
The Holy Instant and Real Relationships (Notes 1310 
9:147) 

T 15 11 . 
Here, there is no concealment, and no private thoughts. 
The 
WILLINGNESS to communicate attracts communication TO it, and 
overcomes loneliness completely. 
There is complete forgiveness 
here, for there is no desire to exclude ANYONE from your comple¬ 
tion, in sudden recognition of the value of his part in it. 
In the pro¬ 
tection of YOUR wholeness, all are invited and made welcome. 
And 
you understand that YOUR completion is God's, Whose only need 
is to have you Be complete. 
For your completion MAKES you His, in 
YOUR awareness. 
And here it is that you experience yourself as you 
were created, AND AS YOU ARE. 


T 15 12 . 
The holy instant does not REPLACE the need for learning, 
for the Holy Spirit must not leave you as your Teacher, until the 
holy instant has extended far beyond time. 
For a teaching assign¬ 
ment such as His, He must use EVERYTHING in this world for your 


1-536 


546 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


release. 
He must side with EVERY sign or token of your willingness 
to learn of Him what truth MUST be. 
He is swift to utilize WHAT¬ 
EVER you offer Him, on behalf of this. 
His concern and care for you 
are limitless. 
In the face of your fear of forgiveness, which He per¬ 
ceives as clearly as He knows forgiveness IS release. 
He will teach 
you to remember always that forgiveness is NOT loss, BUT YOUR 
SALVATION. 
And that, in COMPLETE forgiveness, in which you 
recognize that there is nothing to forgive, YOU are absolved com¬ 
pletely. 


T 15 13. 
Hear Him gladly, and learn of Him that you have need of no 
special T(589) - 416 - relationships at all. 
You but seek in them what 
you have THROWN AWAY. 
And, through THEM, you will never 
learn the value of what you have cast aside, but what you still desire 
with all your hearts. 
Let us join together in making the holy instant 
all that there is, by desiring that it BE all that there is. 
God's Son has 
such great need of your willingness to strive for this, that you can¬ 
not conceive of need so great. 
Behold the only need that God and 
His Son share, and will to meet together. 
You are NOT alone in this. 

The will of your creations call 575 to you, to share your will with 
them. 
Turn, then, in peace, from guilt to God and them. 


T 1514. 
Relate only with what will never LEAVE you, and what YOU 
cannot leave. 
The loneliness of God's Son is the loneliness of his Fa¬ 
ther. 
Refuse not the awareness of your completion, and seek not to 
restore it to yourselves. 
Fear not to give redemption over to your 
Redeemer's love. 
He will NOT fail you, for He comes from One 
Who CANNOT fail. 
Accept YOUR sense of failure as nothing more 
than a mistake in WHO YOU WERE. 
For the holy host of God is 
BEYOND failure, and NOTHING that he wills can BE denied. 
You 
are forever in a relationship so holy, that it calls to everyone to ES¬ 
CAPE from loneliness, and join you in your Love. 
And where YOU 
are must everyone seek, and FIND you there. 



373 Agreement in number problem. 
“Will” is the subject, “call" the verb, and since will is singular, the 
verb must be “calls.” FIP corrects this, though all other versions retain what we believe is a grammar 
error. 
It is the will that calls, not the creations which call, grammatically speaking 


547 


1-537 



Volume I Text 


T 15 I 5. 
Think but an instant on this; God gave the Sonship to you, to 
ensure your perfect creation. 
This was His Gift, for, as He withheld 
Himself not from you. 
He withheld not His creation. 
Nothing that 
ever was created, but is not yours. 
Your relationships are with the 
universe. 
And this universe, being of God, is far beyond the petty 
sum of all the separate bodies YOU perceive. 
For all its parts are 
joined in God through Christ, where they become like to their Fa¬ 
ther. 
For Christ knows of no separation FROM His Father, Who is 
His One relationship, in which He gives as His Father gives to Him. 

T(590) - 417 - 

T 15 16 . 
The Holy Spirit is God's attempt to free you of what He does 
not understand. 
And, because of the Source of the attempt, IT WILL 
SUCCEED. 
The Holy Spirit asks you to respond as God does, for He 
would teach you what YOU do not understand. 
God would respond 
to EVERY need, WHATEVER form it takes. 
And so He has kept this 
Channel open to receive His communication to you, AND YOURS 
TO HIM. 
God does NOT understand your problem in communica¬ 
tion, for He does NOT share it with you. 
It is only YOU, who believe 
that it IS understandable. 


T 1517. 
The Holy Spirit KNOWS that it is not understandable, and 
yet He UNDERSTANDS it, because you have MADE it. 
In Him 
alone, lies the awareness of what God CANNOT know, and what 
YOU do NOT understand. 
It is His holy function to ACCEPT THEM 
BOTH, and, by removing EVERY element of Disagreement, to join 
them into one. 
He will do this, BECAUSE it is His function. 
Leave, 
then, what seems to you to be impossible, to Him Who knows it 
MUST be possible, because it is the Will of God. 
And let Him, 

Whose teaching is ONLY of God, teach you the ONLY meaning of 
relationships. 
For God Himself created the only relationship that 
HAS meaning, and that is His relationship with YOU. 
T(591) - 418 - 576 

T 15 18 . 
As the ego would limit your perception of your brothers to 
the body, so would the Holy Spirit RELEASE your vision, and let 


576 December 18, 1966. 



1-538 


548 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


you see the Great Rays shining from them, so unlimited that they 
reach to God. 
It is this shift in vision which is accomplished in the 
holy instant. 
Yet it is needful for you to learn just what this shift en¬ 
tails, so you will become willing to make it permanent. 
Given this 
willingness, it will NOT leave you, for it IS permanent. 
For, once 
you have accepted it as the ONLY PERCEPTION THAT YOU 
WANT, it is translated into knowledge, by the part that God Him¬ 
self plays in the Atonement, for it is the ONLY step in it He under¬ 
stands. 
Therefore, in this there will be NO delay, when YOU are 
ready for it. 
God is ready NOW, but YOU are not. 


T 1519. 
Our task is but to continue, as fast as possible, the necessary 
process of looking straight at ALL the interference, and seeing it 
EXACTLY as it is. 
For it is impossible to recognize as WHOLLY 
without gratification, WHAT YOU THINK YOU WANT. 
The body 
is the symbol of the ego, as the ego is the symbol of separation. 
And 
both are nothing more than attempts to LIMIT communication, and 
thereby TO MAKE IT IMPOSSIBLE. 
For communication MUST be 
UNlimited in order to HAVE meaning, and DEPRIVED of meaning, 
it will NOT satisfy YOU completely. 
Yet it remains the ONLY means 
by which you CAN establish real relationships. 


T 15110. 
Real relationships HAVE no limits, having been established 
by God. 
In the holy instant, where the Great Rays REPLACE the 
body in awareness, the recognition of relationships WITHOUT lim¬ 
its is given you. 
But to SEE this, it is necessary to give up EVERY use 
the ego has for the body, and to accept the fact that the ego has NO 
purpose you would SHARE with it. 
For the ego would limit every¬ 
one TO a body for ITS purposes, and, while you think it HAS a pur¬ 
pose, you will choose to utilize the means by which IT tries to turn 
its purpose into accomplishment. 
This will never BE accomplished. 


T 15 1 ll. 
Yet you have surely recognized that the ego, whose goals 
are altogether UNattainable, will strive for them with all its might. 

And will do T(592) - 419 - so with the strength that YOU have given it. 

Yet it is impossible to DIVIDE your strength between Heaven and 
hell, God and the ego, and RELEASE your power unto creation, that 


549 


1-539 


Volume I Text 


is the ONLY purpose for which it was GIVEN you. 
For love would 
always give INCREASE. 
Limits are DEMANDED, representing the 
ego's demands to make little and ineffectual. 
Limit your vision of a 
brother to his body, which you WILL do, as long as you would not 
release him FROM it, and you have denied HIS gift to YOU. 
HIS 
BODY CANNOT GIVE IT. 
And seek it not through YOURS. 


T 15 112. 
But your minds are ALREADY continuous, and THEIR un¬ 
ion need only be accepted, and the loneliness in Heaven is gone. 
If 
you would but let the Holy Spirit tell you of the Love of God for 
you, and the need that your creations have to be with you forever, 
you would experience the attraction of the Eternal. 
For no-one can 
hear Him speak of this, and long remain willing to linger here. 
For it 
IS your will to be in Heaven, where you are complete and quiet, in 
such sure and loving relationships, that ANY limits are impossible. 

Would you not exchange your little relationships for this? For the 
body IS little and limited, and only those whom you would see 
WITHOUT the limits that the ego would impose on them, can offer 
YOU the gift of freedom. 


T 15 113. 
You have no conception of the limits you have placed on 
your perception, and no idea of all the loveliness that you COULD 
see. 
But this you must remember; the attraction of guilt OPPOSES 
the attraction of God. 
His attraction for you remains unlimited, but, 
because your power, BEING His, is AS GREAT as His, you can 
TURN AWAY from love. 
What you invest in guilt, you withdraw 
from God. 
And your sight grows weak and dim and limited, for you 
have attempted to SEPARATE the Father from the Son, and LIMIT 
their communication. 
Seek not Atonement in FURTHER separation. 

And limit not your vision of God's Son to what INTERFERES with 
his release, and what the Holy Spirit must UNDO to set him free. 


For his belief in limits HAS imprisoned him. 
T(593) - 420 - 

T 15 J. 
The Time of Christ (Notes 1320 9:157) 

T 15 J l. 
When the body ceases to attract you, and when you place no 
value on it as a means of GETTING ANYTHING, then there will be 
NO interference in communication. 
And your thoughts will be as 


1-540 


550 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


free as God's. 
As you let the Holy Spirit teach you how to use the 
body ONLY for purposes of communication, and RENOUNCE its 
use for separation and attack, which the EGO sees in it, you will 
learn you have no need of a body at all. 
In the holy instant, there 
ARE no bodies. 
And you experience ONLY the attraction of God. 

Accepting it as undivided, you join Him wholly, in an instant. 
For 
you would place NO limits on your union WITH Him. 
The reality of 
THIS relationship becomes the only truth that you could ever 
WANT. 
ALL Truth IS here. 


T 15 J 2. 
It IS in your power, IN TIME, to delay the perfect union of 
the Father and the Son. 
For in this world, the attraction of guilt 
DOES stand between them. 
Neither time nor season means anything 
in eternity. 
But here, it is the Holy Spirit's function to use them both, 
NOT as the ego uses them. 
This is the season when you would cele¬ 
brate my birth into this world. 
Yet you know not how to do it. 
Let 
the Holy Spirit teach you, and let ME celebrate YOUR birth through 
Him. 
The only gift I can accept of you, is the gift I GAVE you. 
Re¬ 
lease ME, as I willed YOUR release. 
The time of Christ we celebrate 
TOGETHER. 
For it HAS no meaning, if we are apart. 


T 15 J 3. 
The holy instant is truly the time of Christ. 
For, in this liber¬ 
ating instant, no guilt is laid upon the Son of God, and his unlimited 
power is thus restored to him. 
What OTHER gift can you offer me, 
when ONLY THIS I will to offer YOU? And to see me, is to see me 
in everyone, and offer everyone the gift you offer me. 
I am incapable 
of receiving sacrifice as God is. 
And every sacrifice you ask of 
YOURSELF, you ask of me. 
Learn NOW that sacrifice, of ANY kind, 
is nothing but a LIMITATION IMPOSED ON GIVING. 
And, BY this 
limitation, you have limited YOUR acceptance of the gift I offer 
YOU. 
T(594) - 421 - 

T 15 J 4. 
We who are one, cannot give separately. 
When you are will¬ 
ing to accept OUR relationship AS REAL, guilt will hold NO attrac¬ 
tion for you. 
For, in OUR union, you will accept ALL of our broth¬ 
ers. 
The gift of union is the only gift that I was born to give. 
Give it 
to ME, that YOU may have it. 
The time of Christ is the time ap- 


551 


1-541 


Volume I Text 


pointed for the gift of freedom, offered to everyone. 
And, by YOUR 
acceptance of it, you have offered it TO everyone. 
It IS in your 
power to make this season holy. 
For it is in your power to make the 
time of Christ be NOW. 
T(595) - 422 - 577 

T 15 J 5. 
It is possible to do this all at once, because there is but ONE 
shift in perception that is necessary. 
For you made but ONE mis¬ 
take. 
It SEEMS like many, but it is all the same. 
For, though the ego 
takes many forms, it is ALWAYS the same idea. 
What is NOT love is 
always fear, and nothing else. 
It is not necessary to follow fear 
through all the circuitous routes by which it burrows underground, 
and hides in darkness, to emerge in FORMS quite different from 
what it IS. 
It IS necessary to examine each one, as long as you would 
retain the PRINCIPLE which governs all of them. 
But when you are 
willing to regard them, NOT as separate, but as DIFFERENT 
MANIFESTATIONS OF THE SAME IDEA, and ONE YOU DO NOT 
WANT, they go together. 


T 15 J 6. 
The idea is simply this; you believe that it is possible to be 
host to the ego, or hostage to God. 
This is the choice you think you 
have, and the decision that you believe that you must make. 
You see 
no other alternatives. 
For you can NOT accept the fact that SACRI¬ 
FICE GETS NOTHING. 
Sacrifice is so essential to your thought- 
system, that salvation, APART from sacrifice, means NOTHING to 
you. 
Your confusion of sacrifice and love is so profound that you 
cannot conceive of love WITHOUT sacrifice. 
And it is THIS that you 
must look at; SACRIFICE IS ATTACK, NOT LOVE. 
If you would 
accept but this ONE idea, your fear of love would vanish. 


T 15 J 7. 
Guilt CANNOT last, when the idea of sacrifice has been re¬ 
moved. 
For, if there MUST be sacrifice, as you are convinced, some¬ 
one must pay, and someone must get. 
And the ONLY question that 
remains to BE decided is HOW MUCH is the price, for getting 
WHAT. 
As host to the ego, you believe that you can give ALL your 
guilt away, WHATEVER you think, and purchase peace. 
For the 


577 December 23, 1966. 



1-542 


552 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


payment DOES NOT SEEM TO BE YOURS. 
While it is obvious that 
the ego DOES demand payment, it NEVER seems to be demanding 
it OF YOU. 
For you are unwilling to recognize that the ego, which 
you INVITED, is treacherous only to those who think they are its 
host. 


T 15 J 8. 
The ego will NEVER let you perceive this, for this recogni¬ 
tion WILL make it homeless. 
For, when this recognition dawns 
clearly, you will NOT be T(596) - 423 - deceived by ANY form the ego 
takes, to protect itself FROM your sight. 
Each form will be recog¬ 
nized as but a cover, for the one idea that hides behind them all. 


That love demands sacrifice, and is therefore INSEPARABLE from 
attack and fear. 
And that GUILT IS THE PRICE OF LOVE, which 
MUST be paid BY fear. 
How fearful, then, has God become to you, 
and how great a sacrifice do you believe His Love demands! For to¬ 
tal love would demand total sacrifice. 
And so the ego seems to de¬ 
mand LESS of you than God, and of the two is judged as the 
LESSER of two evils, one to be feared a little, but the Other TO BE 
DESTROYED. 


T 15 J 9. 
For you see love AS DESTRUCTIVE, and your only question 
is WHO is to be destroyed, you or another? You seek to answer this 
question in your special relationships, in which you are both de¬ 
stroyer and destroyed IN PART, but with the idea of being able to 
be neither completely. 
And this you think SAVES YOU FROM 
GOD, whose TOTAL Love would COMPLETELY destroy you. 
You 
think that everyone OUTSIDE yourself demands your sacrifice, but 
you do NOT see that ONLY you demand sacrifice, and ONLY of 
yourself. 
Yet the demand of sacrifice is so savage and so fearful, that 
you CANNOT accept it WHERE IT IS. 
But the REAL price of NOT 
accepting this has been so great, that you have GIVEN GOD AWAY, 
rather than look at it. 


T 15 J10. 
For, if GOD would demand total sacrifice of you, you 
thought it safer to project Him outward and AWAY from you, and 
NOT be host to Him. 
For to Him you ascribed the EGO's treachery, 
inviting it to take His place, and PROTECT you FROM Him. 
And 


553 


1-543 


Volume I Text 


you do not recognize that it is WHAT YOU INVITED IN that would 
destroy you, and DOES demand total sacrifice of you. 
No partial 
sacrifice will appease this savage guest, for it is an invader who but 
SEEMS to offer kindness, but ALWAYS to MAKE THE SACRIFICE 
COMPLETE. 
You will NOT succeed in being PARTIAL hostage to 
the ego, for it keeps NO bargains, and would leave you NOTHING. 

Nor can you be partial HOST to it. 


T 15 J ll. 
You will have to choose between TOTAL freedom and TO¬ 
TAL bondage, for there are no alternatives but these. 
You have tried 
many compromises, in the attempt to avoid recognizing the one de¬ 
cision that MUST be made. 
And T(597) - 424 - yet, it is the RECOGNI¬ 
TION of the decision, JUST AS IT IS, that makes the decision so 
easy! Salvation is simple, being of God, and therefore VERY easy to 
understand. 
But do not try to project it FROM you, and see it OUT¬ 
SIDE yourself. 
In YOU are both the question and the Answer; the 
demand for sacrifice and the peace of God. 


T 15 K. 
The End of Sacrifice (Notes 1329 9:166) 

T 15 K1 . 
Fear not to recognize as SOLELY OF YOUR MAKING the 
whole idea of sacrifice. 
And seek not safety by attempting to PRO¬ 
TECT yourself from where it is NOT. 
Your brothers and your Father 
have become VERY fearful to you, and you would bargain with 
them for a few special relationships, in which you think you see 
some scraps of safety. 
Do not try longer to KEEP APART your 
thoughts and the Thought that has been GIVEN you. 
When they are 
brought together, and perceived WHERE THEY ARE, the choice 
BETWEEN them is nothing more than a gentle awakening, and as 
simple as opening your eyes to daylight, when you have no more 
need of sleep. 


T 15 K 2. 
The sign of Christmas is a star, a light in darkness. 
See it not 
OUTSIDE of yourself, but as shining in the Heaven within, and ac¬ 
cept it as the sign the time of Christ has come. 
He comes demanding 
NOTHING. 
No sacrifice of ANY kind, of ANYONE, is asked by 
Him. 
In His Presence, the whole IDEA of sacrifice loses ALL mean¬ 
ing. 
For He is Host to God. 
And you need but invite Him in Who is 


1-544 


554 


Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


there ALREADY, by recognizing that His Host is One. 
And no 
thought ALIEN to His Oneness can abide with Him there. 
Love 
MUST be total to give Him welcome, for the Presence of holiness 
CREATES the holiness which surrounds It. 
No fear can touch the 
Host Who cradles God in the time of Christ. 
For the Host is as holy 
as the Perfect Innocence that He protects, and Whose Power protects 
HIM. 


T 15 K 3. 
This Christmas, give the Holy Spirit EVERYTHING that 
would hurt you. 
LET yourself be healed completely, that you may 
JOIN with Him in healing. 
And let us celebrate our release together, 
by releasing everyone WITH us. 
Leave nothing behind, for release is 
TOTAL. 
And when you have accepted it WITH me, you will GIVE it 
with me. 
All pain and sacrifice and littleness will disappear in OUR 
relationship, which is as innocent as our relationship with T(598) - 425 
- our Father, and as powerful. 
Pain will be brought to us, and disap¬ 
pear in our presence. 
And, WITHOUT pain, there can BE no sacri¬ 
fice. 
And WITHOUT SACRIFICE, there love MUST be. 


T 15 K 4. 
You who believe that sacrifice IS love, must learn that sacri¬ 
fice is separation FROM love. 
For sacrifice brings guilt, as surely as 
love brings peace. 
Guilt is the CONDITION of sacrifice, as peace is 
the condition for the awareness of your relationship with God. 
For 
through guilt, you EXCLUDE your Father and your brothers FROM 
yourself. 
And through peace, you will invite them back, and realize 
they are where your invitation bids them be. 
What you excluded 
from yourself seems fearful, for you ENDOWED it with fear, and 
tried to CAST IT OUT, though it was part of you. 
Who can perceive 
part of himself as loathsome, and live within himself in peace? And 
who can try to resolve the perceived conflict of Heaven and hell IN 
HIM by casting Heaven out, and GIVING IT the attributes of hell, 
WITHOUT experiencing himself as incomplete and lonely? 

T 15 K 5. 
As long as you perceive the body as your reality, so long 
will you perceive yourself as lonely and deprived. 
And so long will 
you also perceive yourself as a VICTIM OF SACRIFICE, JUSTIFIED 
in sacrificing others. 
For who could thrust Heaven and its Creator 


555 


1-545 


Volume I Text 


aside, WITHOUT a sense of sacrifice and loss? And who can suffer 
sacrifice and loss, without attempting to RESTORE himself? Yet 
how could you accomplish this yourselves, when the basis of your 
attempts is the belief in the REALITY OF THE DEPRIVATION? For 
deprivation breeds attack, BEING the belief that attack IS justified. 

And, as long as you would RETAIN the deprivation, attack becomes 
salvation, and sacrifice becomes love. 


T 15 K 6. 
So is it that, in all your seeking for love, YOU SEEK FOR 
SACRIFICE, and FIND it. 
578 Yet you find NOT love. 
For it is impos¬ 
sible to DENY what love IS, and still RECOGNIZE it. 
The meaning 
of love lies in what you have cast OUTSIDE yourself, and it HAS no 
meaning at all, APART from you. 
It is what you preferred to KEEP, 
that has no meaning. 
While all that you would KEEP T(599) - 426 - 
AWAY hold all the meaning of the universe, and holds the universe 
together in its meaning. 
For, unless the universe were joined in 
YOU, it would be APART FROM God, and to be without Him IS to 
be without meaning. 


T 15 K 7. 
In the holy instant, the condition of love is met, for minds 
are joined without the body's INTERFERENCE, and where there is 
communication, there is peace. 
The Prince of Peace was born to re¬ 
establish the CONDITION of love, by teaching that communication 
remains unbroken, even if the body is destroyed, PROVIDED THAT 
you see NOT the body as the necessary means of communication. 

And if you UNDERSTAND this lesson, you will realize that, to sac¬ 
rifice the BODY, is to SACRIFICE NOTHING. 
And communication, 
which MUST be of the mind, CANNOT be sacrificed. 
Where, then, 
is sacrifice? 

T 15 K 8. 
The lesson I was born to teach, and still would teach to all 
my brothers, is that sacrifice is nowhere and love is everywhere. 
For 


,7S Psalms 40:6 Sacrifice and offering You did not desire; My ears You have opened; burnt offering and 
sin offering You have not asked. 


Psalms 51:16 For You do not desire sacrifice; or else I would give it; You do not delight in burnt 
offering. 


Matthew 12:7 “But if you had known what this is, ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice,’ you would not 
have condemned those who are not guilty.” 


1-546 


556 



Chapter 15 - The Purpose of Time 


communication EMBRACES EVERYTHING, and in the peace it re¬ 
establishes, love comes of itself. 
Let no despair darken the joy of 
Christmas, for the time of Christ is meaningless APART from joy. 


Let us join in celebrating peace by demanding no sacrifice of any¬ 
one, for so will you offer me the love I offer you. 
What can be more 
joyous than to perceive WE ARE DEPRIVED OF NOTHING? Such 
is the message of the time of Christ, which I give you, that YOU may 
give it, and return it to the Father, Who gave it to me. 


T 15 K 9. 
For in the time of Christ, communication with Him is re¬ 
stored, and He joins us in the celebration of His Son's Creation. 
God 
offers thanks to the holy host who would receive Him, and let Him 
enter, and abide where He would be. 
And BY your welcome, does 
HE welcome you into Himself. 
For what is contained in you who 
welcome Him is RETURNED to Him. 
And we but celebrate HIS 
Wholeness, as we welcome Him into ourselves. 
Those who receive 
the Father are one with Him, being host to Him Who created them. 

And by allowing Him to enter, the remembrance of the Father enters 
with Him, and with Him they remember the only relationship they 
ever had, and ever want to have. 
T(600) -427 579 

T 15 K10. 
This is the week-end in which a new year will be born from 
the time of Christ. 
I have perfect faith in you, to do all that you 
would accomplish. 
Nothing will be lacking, and you will MAKE 
COMPLETE, and NOT destroy. 
Say and UNDERSTAND this: 

I give you to the Holy Spirit, as part of myself. 


I know that you will be released, UNLESS I WANT TO 
USE YOU TO IMPRISON MYSELF. 


In the name of MY freedom, I WILL your release. 


Because I recognize that we will be released TOGETHER. 


So will the year begin in joy and freedom. 
There is much to do, and 
we have been long delayed. 
Accept the holy instant as this year is 
born, and take your place, so long left unfulfilled, in the Great 


579 December 28, 1966 


557 


1-547 



Volume I Text 


Awakening. 
Make this year different, by making it ALL THE SAME. 

And let ALL your relationships be made holy FOR you. 
This is OUR 
will. 


Amen. 
(601) -428 580 


580 December 30, 1966 


1-548 


PROOF 


558 


COPY 



Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 

T 16 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1354 9:191) 

T 16 A l. 
To empathize does NOT mean to JOIN IN SUFFERING, for 
this is what you must REFUSE to understand. 
This is the EGO's in¬ 
terpretation of empathy, and is ALWAYS used to form a special re¬ 
lationship, in which SUFFERING is shared. 
The CAPACITY to em¬ 
pathize is VERY useful to the Holy Spirit, provided you let Him use 
it in His way. 
His way is very different. 
581 He does NOT understand 
suffering, and would have you teach IT IS NOT UNDERSTAND¬ 
ABLE. 
When He relates through you. 
He does NOT relate through 
the ego to another ego. 
He does NOT join in pain, knowing that 
HEALING pain is NOT accomplished by delusional attempts to 
ENTER INTO IT, and lighten it by SHARING the delusion. 


T 16 A 2. 
The clearest proof that empathy, as the ego uses it, is DE¬ 
STRUCTIVE, lies in the fact that it is applied ONLY to certain types 
of problems, and in certain people. 
These it SELECTS OUT and 
JOINS WITH. 
And it NEVER joins, except to strengthen itself. 
Hav¬ 
ing identified with what it THINKS it understands, it sees ITSELF, 
and would INCREASE itself by sharing what is LIKE itself. 
Make no 
mistake about this maneuver; the ego always EMPATHIZES TO 
WEAKEN. 
And to weaken is ALWAYS to attack. 


T 16 A 3. 
You do NOT know what empathizing means. 
But of this you 
may be sure; if you will merely sit quietly by, and let the Holy Spirit 
relate THROUGH you, you will EMPATHIZE WITH STRENGTH, 
and both of you will gain in strength, and NOT in weakness. 
Your 
part is only to remember this; you do not want anything that YOU 
value to come of the relationship. 
You will neither to hurt it, NOR 
TO HEAL IT in your own way. 
You do NOT know what healing IS. 

All you have learned of empathy IS FROM THE PAST. 
And there is 


581 This sentence does not appear in the Urtext manuscript but does show up in the Notes and in the FIP 
2" d Edition. 
It appears to be an inadvertent omission. 



559 


1-549 



Volume I Text 


NOTHING from the past that you would share, for there is nothing 
there that YOU WOULD KEEP. 
T(602) -429 582 
T 16 A 4. 
Do NOT use empathy to MAKE THE PAST REAL, and so 
perpetuate it. 
Step gently aside, and let the healing be done FOR 
you. 
Keep but one thought in mind, and do not lose sight of it, how¬ 
ever tempted you may be to judge the situation, and DETERMINE 
your response BY judging it. 
Focus your mind only on this: 583 
"I am not alone, and I would not intrude the past upon my Guest. 


I have invited Him, and He is here. 


I need do nothing except NOT TO INTERFERE." 

T 16 B. 
True Empathy (Notes 1356 9:193) 

T 16 B 1 . 
True empathy is of Him Who knows what it is. 
YOU will 
learn HIS interpretation of it, if you let Him use YOUR capacity for 
strength, and NOT for weakness. 


T 16 B 2. 
He will NOT desert you, but be sure that YOU desert not 
Him. 
Humility is strength in this sense only; to recognize and AC¬ 
CEPT the fact that you do NOT know, is to recognize and accept the 
fact that He DOES know. 
You are not sure that He will do His part, 
because you have NEVER YET DONE YOURS COMPLETELY. 
You 
will NOT know how to respond to what you do NOT understand. 

Be tempted not in this and yield not to the ego's triumphant use of 
empathy, for ITS glory. 
The triumph of weakness is NOT what you 
would offer to a brother. 
And yet you know no triumph but this. 

This is NOT knowledge, and the form of empathy that would bring 
it about, is so distorted that it would imprison what it would re¬ 
lease. 


T 16 B 3. 
The unredeemed cannot redeem. 
Yet they HAVE a Re¬ 
deemer. 
Attempt to teach Him not. 
YOU are the learner; HE the 
Teacher. 
Do not confuse your role with His, for this will NEVER 
bring peace to anyone. 
Offer your empathy to Him, for it is HIS per- 


582 December 30, 1966 (CONTINUED) 

583 While the Urtext manuscript has a semi-colon here, the Notes has a colon which is more appropriate. 

The HLC and FIP versions also use a colon here. 



1-550 


560 



Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


ception and His STRENGTH that you would share. 
And let Him 
offer you HIS strength and HIS perception, to be shared THROUGH 
you. 
T(603) -430 

The meaning of love is lost in any relationship which looks to weak¬ 
ness, and hopes to find it there. 
The POWER of love, which IS its 
meaning, lies in the strength of God, which hovers over it and 
blesses it silently, by enveloping it in healing wings. 
LET THIS BE, 
and do not try to substitute YOUR "miracle" for this. 


T 16 B 4. 
We once said that, if a brother asks a foolish thing of you, to 
do it. 
But be certain that this does NOT mean to do a foolish thing 
that would hurt either him or you, for what would hurt one WILL 
hurt the other. 
Foolish requests ARE foolish, for the simple reason 
THAT THEY CONFLICT, because they contain an element of spe¬ 
cialness. 
Only the Holy Spirit recognizes foolish needs, AS WELL 
AS real ones. 
And He will teach you how to meet BOTH, without 
losing either. 


T 16 B 5. 
YOU will be able to do this ONLY IN SECRECY. 
And you 
will think that, by meeting the needs of one, you do NOT jeopardize 
another, because you keep them SEPARATE, and secret from each 
other. 
This is NOT the way, for it leads not to light and truth. 
No 
needs will long be left unmet, if you leave them ALL to Him Whose 
FUNCTION is to meet them. 
This is His function, and NOT YOURS. 

He will NOT meet them secretly, for He would share everything 
you give through Him. 
And that is WHY He gives it. 
What you give 
through Him is for the whole Sonship, NOT FOR PART OF IT. 

Leave Him His function, for He WILL fulfill it, if you but ask Him to 
enter your relationships, and bless them FOR you. 
T(604) -431 584 

T 16 C. 
The Magnitude of Holiness (Notes 1336 9:173) 

T 16 c l. 
You still think holiness is difficult, because you cannot see 
how it can be extended to include EVERYONE, and you HAVE 
learned that it MUST include everyone, to BE holy. 
Concern your¬ 
selves not with the EXTENSION of holiness, for the nature of mira- 


584 Jan. 
1, 1967 


561 


1-551 




Volume I Text 


cles you do NOT understand. 
Nor do you DO them. 
It is their exten¬ 
sion, far beyond the limits you perceive, that demonstrates you did 
NOT do them. 
Why should you worry how the miracle extends to 
all the Sonship, when you do not understand the miracle itself? One 
ATTRIBUTE is no more difficult to understand than is the whole. 
If 
miracles ARE at all, their attributes would have to be miraculous, 
being PART of them. 


T 16 C 2. 
There is a tendency to fragment, and then to be concerned 
about the truth of just a little PART of the whole. 
And this is but a 
way of avoiding, or looking AWAY FROM the whole, to what you 
think you might be better able to understand. 
And this is but an¬ 
other way in which you would still try to keep understanding TO 
YOURSELF. 
A better and FAR more helpful way to think of mira¬ 
cles is this: You do NOT understand them, either in part OR whole. 

Yet you have DONE them. 
Therefore, YOUR understanding CAN¬ 
NOT be necessary. 
Yet it is still impossible to accomplish what you 
do not understand. 
And so there must be Something IN you that 
DOES understand. 


T 16 C 3. 
To you the miracle CANNOT seem natural, because what 
you have done to hurt your minds, has made THEM so UNnatural 
that they do not remember what is natural to them. 
And when you 
are TOLD about it, you cannot UNDERSTAND it. 
The recognition 
of the part as whole, and of the whole in every part, is PERFECTLY 
natural. 
For it is the way GOD thinks, and what is natural to Him, IS 
natural to you. 
WHOLLY natural perception would show you in¬ 
stantly that order of difficulty in miracles is quite impossible, for it 
involves a contradiction of what miracles MEAN. 
And, if you could 
understand their MEANING, their ATTRIBUTES could hardly 
cause you perplexity. 
T(605) -432 

T 16 C 4. 
You HAVE done miracles, but it is QUITE apparent that you 
have NOT done them alone. 
You have succeeded whenever you 
have reached another mind, and JOINED with it. 
When two minds 
join as one, and share one idea equally, the first link in the aware¬ 
ness of the Sonship as one has been made. 
When you have made 
this joining, as the Holy Spirit bids you, and have OFFERED it to 


1-552 


562 



Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


Him to use as HE knows how. 
His natural perception of your gift 
enables HIM to understand it, and YOU to USE His understanding 
on YOUR behalf. 
It is impossible to convince you of the reality of 
what has clearly BEEN accomplished, through your willingness, as 
long as you believe that YOU must understand it, or else IT is not 
real. 


T 16 c 5. 
You think your LACK of understanding is a LOSS to you, 
and so you are unwilling to believe that what HAS happened is 
true. 
Yet can you REALLY believe that all that has happened, EVEN 
THOUGH you do NOT understand it, HAS NOT HAPPENED? Yet 
this IS your position. 
You would have PERFECT faith in the Holy 
Spirit, and in the EFFECTS of His teaching, if you were not AFRAID 
to acknowledge what He taught you. 
For this acknowledgement 
MEANS that what has happened you do NOT understand, but that 
you are willing to ACCEPT it, BECAUSE it has happened. 
How can 
faith in reality be yours, while you are bent on making it UNreal? 
And are you REALLY safer in maintaining the UNreality of what 
has happened, than you would be in joyously accepting it FOR 
WHAT IT IS, and giving thanks for it? 

T 16 c 6. 
Honor the truth that has been given you, and be glad you do 
NOT understand it. 
Miracles are natural to God, and to the One 
Who speaks for Him. 
For His task is to TRANSLATE the miracle 
into the knowledge which it REPRESENTS, and which IS lost to 
you. 
Let HIS understanding of the miracle be enough for you, and 
do not turn away from all the witnesses that He has given you to 
His reality. 
T(606) -433 NO evidence will convince you of the truth of 
what you do NOT want. 
Yet your relationship with Him IS real, and 
HAS been demonstrated. 
Regard this not with fear, but with rejoic¬ 
ing. 
The One you called upon IS with you. 
Bid Him welcome, and 
honor His witnesses, who bring you the glad tidings that He HAS 
come. 
585 


585 Luke 1:19 And the angel answered and said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of 
God, and was sent to speak to you and bring you these glad tidings.” 

Luke 8:1 Now it came to pass, afterward, that He went through every city and village, preaching and 
bringing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God. 
And the twelve were with Him, 


563 


1-553 



Volume I Text 


T 16 C 7. 
It IS true, JUST AS YOU FEAR, that to acknowledge Him, IS 
to deny ALL that you think you know. 
But it was NEVER true. 


What gain is there to you in clinging to it, and denying the evidence 
for truth? For you have come too near to truth to renounce it now, 
and you WILL yield to its compelling attraction. 
You can delay this 
now, but only a little. 
The host of God has called to you, and you 
HAVE heard. 
Never again will you be wholly willing NOT to listen. 

This is a year of joy, in which your listening will increase, and peace 
will grow with its increase. 


T 16 C 8. 
The power of holiness AND THE WEAKNESS OF ATTACK, 
have BOTH been brought into awareness. 
And this has been accom¬ 
plished in minds firmly convinced that holiness is weakness, and 
attack is power. 
Should not that be a sufficient miracle to teach you 
that your Teacher is NOT of you? But remember also that, whenever 
you have listened to HIS interpretation, the results have brought 
YOU joy. 
Would you PREFER the results of YOUR interpretation, 
considering honestly what they have been? God wills you better. 

Could you not look with greater charity, on whom God loves with 
perfect love? Do not interpret AGAINST His love for you. 
For you 
have many witnesses that speak of it so clearly, that only the blind 
and deaf could fail to see and hear them. 


T 16 C 9. 
This year, determine NOT to deny what has been given you 
BY God, to use for Him. 
He has Himself reminded you of Him. 

Awake and SHARE it, for that is the only reason He has called to 
you. 
His Voice has spoken clearly, and yet you have so little faith in 
what you heard, because you have preferred to place T(607) -434 still 
greater faith in the disaster YOU have made. 
Today, let us resolve 
TOGETHER to accept the joyful tidings that disaster is NOT real, 
and that reality is NOT disaster. 
Reality is safe and sure and wholly 
kind to everyone and everything. 
There is no greater love than to 
accept this, and be glad. 
For love asks only that YOU BE HAPPY, 
and will GIVE you everything that makes for happiness. 


T 16 C 10. 
You have never given ANY problem to the Holy Spirit He 
has not solved. 
NOR will you ever do so. 
You have never tried to 
solve ANYTHING yourself and been successful. 
Is it not time you 


1-554 


564 


Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


brought these facts TOGETHER, and made SENSE of them? This is 
the year for the APPLICATION of the ideas that have been given 
you. 
For the ideas are mighty forces, to be USED, and not held idly 
by. 
They have ALREADY proved their power sufficiently for you to 
place your faith in THEM, and NOT in their denial. 
This year, invest 
in truth, and let it work in peace. 
Have faith in what has faith in 
YOU. 
Think what you have REALLY seen and heard, and RECOG¬ 
NIZE it. 
Can you BE alone, with witnesses like these? T(608) -435 586 

T 16 D. 
The Reward of Teaching (Notes 1343 9:160) 

T 16 D 1. 
You have taught well, and yet you have not learned how to 
ACCEPT the comfort of your teaching. 
If you will consider WHAT 
you have taught, and how alien it is to what you THOUGHT you 
knew, you will be COMPELLED to recognize that your Teacher 
came from BEYOND your thought-system, and so could look upon 
it fairly, and perceive it was untrue. 
And He MUST have done so 
from the basis of a very different thought-system, and one with 
NOTHING IN COMMON WITH YOURS. 
For certainly, what He 
has taught, and what you taught THROUGH Him, HAS nothing in 
common with what you taught BEFORE He came. 
And the results 
have been to bring peace where there was pain, and suffering has 
disappeared, to be replaced by joy. 


T 16 D 2. 
You HAVE taught freedom, but you have NOT learned how 
to be free. 
We once said, "By their fruits ye shall know them, and 
they shall know themselves." 587 For it is certain that you judge 
YOURSELF according to your teaching. 
The ego's teaching pro¬ 
duces IMMEDIATE results, because ITS decisions are immediately 
ACCEPTED AS YOUR CHOICE. 
And this acceptance MEANS that 
you are willing to judge yourself accordingly. 
Cause and effect are 
very clear in the ego's thought-system, because all your learning has 
been directed toward ESTABLISHING the relationship between 


' 6 January 2, 1967 

587 T 9 D 13. 
By following the right Guide, you will learn the simplest of all lessons: “By their fruits ye 
shall know them, and THEY shall know THEMSELVES.” T(396) 223 

Matthew 7:16 “You will know them by their fruits. 
Do men gather grapes from thorn bushes or figs 
from thistles?” 


565 


1-555 



Volume I Text 


them. 
And would you NOT have faith in what you have so dili¬ 
gently taught yourself to believe? But remember how much care you 
have exerted in choosing its witnesses, and in AVOIDING those 
who spoke for the Cause of truth, and ITS effects. 


T 16 D 3. 
Does not the fact that you have NOT learned what you 
HAVE taught, show you that you do NOT perceive the Sonship as 
one? And does it not also show you that you do not regard YOUR¬ 
SELF as one? For it is impossible to teach successfully, WHOLLY 
without conviction, and it is equally impossible that conviction be 
OUTSIDE you. 
You could never have taught freedom, unless you 
DID believe in it. 
And it MUST be that what you taught CAME 
FROM YOURSELF. 
T(609) -436 And yet, this self you clearly DO NOT 
KNOW, and do not recognize EVEN THOUGH IT FUNCTIONS. 

What functions, must be THERE. 
And it is ONLY if you deny 
WHAT IT HAS DONE, that you could possibly deny its presence. 


T 16 D 4. 
This is a course in how to KNOW yourself. 
You have 
TAUGHT what you are, but have NOT let what you are, teach YOU. 

You have been VERY careful to avoid the obvious, and NOT to see 
the REAL cause and effect relationship that is PERFECTLY appar¬ 
ent. 
Yet, within you, is EVERYTHING you taught. 
What can it be, 
that has NOT learned it? It must be this that is REALLY outside 
yourself, NOT by your own projection, BUT IN TRUTH. 
And it is 
this, that you have TAKEN IN, that is NOT you. 
What YOU accept 
into your minds, does not REALLY change them. 
Illusions are but 
beliefs in WHAT IS NOT THERE. 
And the seeming conflict between 
truth and illusion can ONLY be resolved by SEPARATING YOUR¬ 
SELF FROM THE ILLUSION, and NOT from truth. 


T 16 D 5. 
Your teaching has already DONE this, for the Holy Spirit is 
PART OF YOU. 
Created by God, He left neither God nor His crea¬ 
tion. 
He is both God and you, as you are God and Him together. 
For 
God's answer to the separation added more to you than you tried to 
TAKE AWAY. 
He protected both your creations AND you together, 
keeping one with you what you would EXCLUDE. 
And they will 
TAKE THE PLACE of what YOU took in, to replace THEM. 
They 
are QUITE real, and part of the self you do not know. 
And they 


1-556 


566 


Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


communicate to you through the Holy Spirit, and their power and 
gratitude to you for THEIR creation, they offer gladly to your teach¬ 
ing of your self, who is their home. 


T 16 D 6. 
You who are host to God, are also host to THEM. 
For noth¬ 
ing real has ever left the mind of its Creator. 
And what is NOT real 
was NEVER there. 
You are NOT two selves in conflict. 
What is BE¬ 
YOND GOD? If you who hold Him, and whom He holds, ARE the 
universe, all else must be OUTSIDE, where NOTHING is. 
T(610) -437 
YOU have taught this, and from far off in the universe, yet NOT be¬ 
yond yourself, the witnesses to your teaching have gathered to help 
you learn. 
Their gratitude has joined with yours and God's, to 
strengthen your faith in what you taught. 
FOR WHAT YOU 
TAUGHT IS TRUE. 
Alone, you stand OUTSIDE your teaching and 
APART from it. 
But WITH them, you MUST learn that you but 
taught YOURSELF, and LEARNED from the conviction you 
SHARED with them. 


T 16 D 7. 
This year you will begin to learn, and make learning COM¬ 
MENSURATE with teaching. 
You have CHOSEN this, by your own 
willingness to teach. 
Though you seemed to suffer for it, the joy of 
teaching will yet be yours. 
For the joy of teaching is IN THE 
LEARNER, who offers it to the teacher in gratitude, and shares it 
WITH him. 
As you learn, your gratitude to your SELF, Who teaches 
you what He IS, will grow and help you honor Him. 
And you will 
learn His power and strength and purity, and love Him as His Fa¬ 
ther does. 
His Kingdom has no limits and no end, and there is noth¬ 
ing in Him that is not perfect and eternal. 
588 All this is YOU, and 
nothing OUTSIDE of this IS you. 
To your most Holy Self all praise is 
due, for what you are, and for what He is Who created you AS you 
are. 



" Daniel 7:27 Then the kingdom and dominion, 

And the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven, 
Shall be given to the people, the saints of the Most High. 

His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, 

And all dominions shall serve and obey Him.' 


567 


1-557 



Volume I Text 


T 16 D 8. 
Sooner or later must everyone bridge the gap which he 
imagines exists between his selves. 
Each one builds this bridge, 
which CARRIES HIM ACROSS the gap, as soon as he is willing to 
expend some little effort on behalf of bridging it. 
His little efforts are 
powerfully supplemented by the strength of Heaven, and by the 
united will of all who make Heaven what it is, being joined within 
it. 
And so the one who would cross over, is literally transported 
there. 
Your bridge is builded stronger than you think, and your foot 
is planted firmly on it. 
Have no fear that the attraction of those who 
stand on the other side and wait for you, will not draw you safely 
across. 
For you WILL come where you would be, and where your 
Self awaits you. 
T(6ll) -43 8 589 

T 16 E. 
Illusion and Reality of Love (Notes 1360 9:197) 

T 16 E l. 
Be not afraid to look upon the special hate relationship, for 
freedom lies here. 
It would be impossible NOT to know the mean¬ 
ing of love, EXCEPT FOR THIS. 
For the special love relationship, IN 
WHICH THE MEANING OF LOVE IS LOST, is undertaken 
SOLELY to OFFSET this, but NOT to LET IT GO. 
Your salvation will 
rise clearly before your open eyes, as you look on this. 
YOU CAN¬ 
NOT LIMIT HATE. 
The special love relationship will NOT offset it, 
but will merely DRIVE IT UNDERGROUND, and out of sight. 
It is 
essential to bring it INTO sight, and to make NO attempt to hide it. 

For it is the attempt to BALANCE hate with love that makes love 
meaningless to you. 


T 16 E 2. 
The extent of the split that lies in this you do NOT realize. 

And until you do, the split will remain unrecognized, AND THERE¬ 
FORE UNHEALED. 
The symbols of hate against the symbols of love 
play out a conflict that does not exist. 
For symbols stand for some¬ 
thing else, and the SYMBOL of love IS without meaning, if love is 
everything. 
You will go through this last undoing quite unharmed, 
and will emerge AS YOURSELF. 
This is the last step in the readiness 
for God. 
Be not unwilling now, you are too near, and you WILL 
cross the bridge in perfect safety, translated quietly from war to 


589 January 5, 1967 


1-558 


568 



Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


peace. 
For the ILLUSION of love will NEVER satisfy you. 
But its 
REALITY, which awaits you on the other side, WILL give you eve¬ 
rything. 


T 16 E 3. 
The special love relationship is an attempt to limit the de¬ 
structive EFFECTS of hate, by finding a haven in the storm of guilt. 


It makes NO attempt to RISE ABOVE the storm, into the sunlight. 

On the contrary, it EMPL1ASIZES guilt OUTSIDE the haven, by at¬ 
tempting to build barricades AGAINST it, and keep WITHIN them. 

The special love relationship is NOT perceived as of 590 value IN IT¬ 
SELF, but as a place of safety, from which hatred is split off, and 
KEPT APART. 
The special love partner is acceptable ONLY as long 
as he serves this purpose. 
Hatred can enter, and, indeed, is WEL¬ 
COME in some ASPECTS of the relationship, but it is still held to¬ 
gether by the illusion of love. 
T(612) -439 If the illusion goes, the rela¬ 
tionship is broken or becomes unsatisfying, on the grounds of Disil¬ 
lusionment. 


T 16 E 4. 
LOVE IS NOT AN ILLUSION. 
It is a FACT. 
Where Disillu¬ 
sionment is possible, there was NOT love, but HATE. 
For hate IS an 
illusion, and what can change was NEVER love. 
It is certain that 
those who select certain ones as partners in ANY aspect of living, 
and use them for ANY purpose which they would NOT share with 
others, are trying to LIVE WITH guilt rather than DIE OF it. 
This is 
the choice they see. 
And love to them is only AN ESCAPE FROM 
DEATH. 
They seek it desperately, NOT in the peace in which it 
would gladly come quietly TO them. 
And when they find the fear of 
death is still upon them, the "love" relationship loses the illusion 
that it IS what it is NOT. 
For, when the barricades against it are bro¬ 
ken, fear rushes in and hatred triumphs. 


T 16 E 5. 
There are no triumphs of love. 
Only hate is concerned with 
the triumph of love at all. 
The ILLUSION of love CAN triumph over 
the illusion of hate, but ALWAYS at the price of MAKING BOTH 
ILLUSIONS. 
As long as the illusion of hatred lasts, so long WILL 


590 The Urtext manuscript actually has “a” here but the Notes shows “of’ and that reading makes much 
more sense. 



569 


1-559 



Volume I Text 


love be an illusion to you. 
And then the ONLY choice that remains 
possible, is which illusion you PREFER. 
There IS no conflict in the 
choice between truth and illusion. 
Seen in these terms, NO-ONE 
would hesitate. 
But conflict enters the instant the choice seems to be 
one BETWEEN ILLUSIONS, for this choice does NOT matter. 


Where one choice IS as dangerous as the other, the decision MUST 
be one of despair. 


T 16 E 6. 
Your task is NOT to seek for love, but merely to seek and 
FIND all of the barriers WITHIN YOURSELF that you have built 
AGAINST it. 
It is NOT necessary to seek for what is true, but it IS 
necessary to seek for what is FALSE. 
Every illusion is one of fear, 
WHATEVER form it takes. 
T(613) -440 And the attempt to escape from 
one illusion INTO ANOTHER, MUST fail. 
If you seek love OUT¬ 
SIDE yourself, you can be certain that you perceive hatred within, 
AND ARE AFRAID OF IT. 
Yet peace will never come from the IL¬ 
LUSION of love, but ONLY from its reality. 


T 16 E 7. 
Recognize this, for it is true, and truth MUST be recognized, 
if it is to be distinguished from illusion: the special love relationship 
is an attempt TO BRING LOVE INTO SEPARATION. 
And, as such, 
it is nothing more than an attempt to bring love into fear, and 
MAKE IT REAL IN FEAR. 
In fundamental violation of love's one 
condition, the special love relationship would thus ACCOMPLISH 
THE IMPOSSIBLE. 
How but in illusion COULD this be done? It is 
essential that we look VERY closely at exactly what it is you THINK 
you can do, to solve a dilemma which seems very real to you, but 
which does not exist. 
You have come very close to truth. 
And only 
this stands between you and the bridge that leads you into it. 

Heaven waits silently, and your creations are holding out their 
hands to help you cross, and welcome them. 


T 16 E 8. 
FOR IT IS THEY YOU SEEK. 
You seek but for your own 
COMPLETION, and it is they who render you complete. 
The special 
love relationship is but a shabby substitute for what makes you 
whole IN TRUTH, NOT in illusion. 
Your relationship with them IS 
without guilt, and THIS enables you to look on all your brothers 
with gratitude, because your creations were created in union WITH 


1-560 


570 


Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


them. 
Acceptance of your creations IS the acceptance of the oneness 
of creation, without which you would never BE complete. 
No spe¬ 
cialness can offer you what God has given, and what YOU are 
joined WITH Him in giving. 
Across the bridge IS your completion, 
for you will be WHOLLY in God, willing for NOTHING special, but 
only to be wholly like unto Him, completing Him by your comple¬ 
tion. 
T(614) -441 

T 16 E 9. 
Fear not to cross to the abode of peace and perfect holiness. 

Only there is the completion of God and of His Son established for¬ 
ever. 
Seek not for this in the bleak world of illusion, where nothing 
is certain, and where everything fails to satisfy. 
And, in the Name of 
God, be wholly willing to abandon ALL illusion. 
In any relationship 
in which you are wholly willing to accept completion, and ONLY 
this, there is God completed, and His Son WITH Him. 
The bridge 
that leads to union IN YOURSELF, MUST lead to knowledge, for it 
was built with God beside you. 
And will lead you straight to Him, 
where YOUR completion rests, WHOLLY compatible with His. 


T 16 E 10 . 
Every illusion which you accept into your mind, BY JUDG¬ 
ING IT TO BE ATTAINABLE, removes your own sense of comple¬ 
tion, and thus denies the Wholeness of your Father. 
Every fantasy, 
be it of love OR hate, DEPRIVES you of knowledge. 
For fantasies 
ARE the veil behind which truth is hidden. 
To lift the veil, which 
seems so dark and heavy, it is only needful to VALUE truth beyond 
ALL fantasy, and to be entirely UN willing to settle for illusion IN 
PLACE of truth. 
Would you not go THROUGH fear to Love? For 
such the journey SEEMS to be. 
Love calls, though hate would bid 
you stay. 


T 16 E ll. 
Hear not the call of hate, and see no fantasies. 
For your 
completion lies in truth, and NOWHERE ELSE. 
See in the call of 
hate, and in every fantasy that rises to delay you, but the call for 
help, that rises ceaselessly from you to your Creator. 
Would He not 
answer you; whose completion is His? He loves you, wholly WITH¬ 
OUT illusion, as you must love. 
For love IS wholly without illusion, 
and therefore wholly WITHOUT FEAR. 
Whom God remembers, 
MUST be whole. 
And God has NEVER forgotten what makes HIM 


571 


1-561 


Volume I Text 


whole. 
In YOUR completion lies the memory of HIS wholeness, and 
His gratitude to you for His completion. 
T(615) -442 

T 16 E 12. 
In His link with you lie both His INABILITY to forget, and 
YOUR ability to remember. 
In Him are joined your WILLINGNESS 
to love, and all the love of God, Who forgot you not. 
Your Father 
can no more forget the truth in you, than you can fail to remember 
it. 
The Holy Spirit is the bridge to Him, made from your willingness 
to UNITE with Him, and created by His joy, in union WITH you. 

The journey that SEEMED to be endless is ALMOST complete, for 
what IS endless is very near. 
YOU HAVE ALMOST RECOGNIZED 
IT. 
Turn with me firmly away from ALL illusion NOW, and let 
nothing stand in the way of truth. 
We will take the last foolish jour¬ 
ney AWAY FROM truth together. 
And then TOGETHER we go 
straight to God, in joyous answer to His call for His completion. 


T 16 E 13. 
If special relationships of ANY kind would HINDER God's 
completion, CAN they have any value TO YOU? What would inter¬ 
fere with God, MUST interfere with you. 
Only in time does interfer¬ 
ence in God's completion SEEM to be possible. 
The bridge that He 
would carry you across, lifts you FROM time into eternity. 
Waken 
from time, and answer fearlessly the call of Him Who gave eternity 
to you in your creation. 
On this side of the bridge to timelessness, 
you understand nothing. 
But, as you step lightly across it, upheld 
BY Timelessness, you are directed straight to the heart of knowl¬ 
edge. 
At Its center, and ONLY there, you are safe forever, BECAUSE 
YOU ARE COMPLETE FOREVER. 
There is no veil the love of God 
in us together CANNOT lift. 
The way to Truth is open. 
Follow it 
with me. 


T 16 F. 
Specialness and Guilt (Notes 1370 9:207) 

T 16 F l. 
In looking at the special relationship, it is necessary first to 
realize that it involves a great amount of pain. 
Anxiety, despair, 
guilt, and attack all enter into it, BROKEN INTO by periods in 
which they SEEM to be gone. 
All these must be understood for what 
they ARE. 
Whatever form they take, they are always an attack on 
the self, TO MAKE THE OTHER GUILTY. 
T(616) -443 We have spo- 


1-562 


572 


Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


ken of this before, but there are some aspects of what is REALLY 
being attempted, that we have not touched on. 
Very simply, the at¬ 
tempt to make guilty is ALWAYS directed against God. 
For the ego 
would have you see Him, AND HIM ALONE, as guilty, leaving the 
Sonship OPEN to attack, and unprotected against it. 


T 16 F 2. 
The 591 special love relationship is the ego's chief weapon for 
keeping you from Heaven. 
It does not APPEAR to be a weapon, but 
if you consider HOW you VALUE it, and why, you will realize what 
it MUST be. 
The special love relationship is the ego's most boasted 
gift, and the one that has the most appeal to those unwilling to re¬ 
linquish guilt. 
The "dynamics" of the ego are clearest here, for, 
counting on the attraction of this offering, the fantasies which center 
around this, are often quite open. 
Here, they are usually judged to 
be quite acceptable, and even NATURAL. 
No-one considers it bi¬ 
zarre to love and hate together, and even those who believe that 
hate is "sin", merely feel guilty, but do NOT correct it. 


T 16 F 3. 
This IS the "natural" condition of the separation. 
And those 
who learn that it is NOT natural at all, seem to be the UNnatural 
ones. 
For this world IS the opposite of Heaven, having been made to 
BE its opposite. 
And EVERYTHING here takes a direction EX¬ 
ACTLY opposite to what is true. 
In Heaven, where the meaning of 
love is known, love is the same as UNION. 
Here, where the ILLU¬ 
SION of love is accepted IN ITS PLACE, love is perceived as separa¬ 
tion and EXCLUSION. 


T 16 F 4. 
It is in the special relationship, born of the hidden wish for 
special love from God, that the ego's hatred triumphs. 
For the spe¬ 
cial relationship is THE RENUNCIATION OF THE LOVE OF GOD, 
and the attempt to secure for the self the specialness that He denied. 

And it is essential T(617) -444 to the preservation of the ego, that you 
believe this specialness is NOT hell, but HEAVEN. 
For the ego 
would never have you see that the separation can ONLY BE LOSS, 
being the one condition in which Heaven CANNOT be. 



591 January 6, 1967 


573 


1-563 



Volume I Text 


T 16 F 5. 
To everyone. 
Heaven is completion. 
There CAN be no dis¬ 
agreement on this, because both the ego AND the Holy Spirit accept 
it. 
They are, however, in complete Disagreement on what comple¬ 
tion IS, and HOW it is accomplished. 
The Holy Spirit knows that 
self completion lies first in union, and then in the EXTENSION of 
union. 
To the ego, completion lies in triumph, and in the extension 
of the "victory," even to the final triumph over God. 
In THIS it sees 
the ultimate FREEDOM of the self, for nothing would remain to in¬ 
terfere with IT. 
And this IS its idea of Heaven. 
From this it follows 
that union, which is a condition in which the EGO cannot interfere, 
MUST BE HELL. 


T 16 F 6. 
The special relationship is a strange and unnatural ego de¬ 
vice for joining hell and Heaven, and making them indistinguish¬ 
able. 
And the attempt to find the imagined "best" of BOTH worlds, 
has merely led to FANTASIES of both, and to the inability to per¬ 
ceive either one AS IT IS. 
The special relationship is the triumph of 
this confusion. 
It is a kind of union from which UNION IS EX¬ 
CLUDED, and the BASIS for the ATTEMPT at union RESTS on ex¬ 
clusion. 
What better example could there be of the ego's maxim, 
"Seek, and do NOT find?" 

T 16 F 7. 
Most curious of all, is the concept of the self, which the ego 
fosters in the special relationship. 
This "self" SEEKS the relation¬ 
ship, to MAKE ITSELF COMPLETE. 
Yet, when it FINDS the special 
relationship in which it thinks it can ACCOMPLISH this, IT GIVES 
ITSELF AWAY, and tries to TRADE itself for the self of another. 


This is NOT union, for there is T(618) -445 NO increase and NO exten¬ 
sion. 
Each partner tries to sacrifice the self he does NOT want, for 
one he thinks he would PREFER. 
He feels guilty for the "sin" of 
TAKING, and of giving nothing of value in return. 
For how much 
value CAN he place upon a self that he would GIVE AWAY, to get a 
BETTER one? 

T 16 F 8. 
The "better" self the ego seeks is ALWAYS one that is MORE 
special. 
And whoever SEEMS to possess a special self is "loved," 
FOR WHAT CAN BE TAKEN FROM HIM. 
Where both partners see 
this special self IN EACH OTHER, the EGO sees "a union made in 


1-564 


574 



Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


Heaven." For NEITHER will recognize that HE HAS ASKED FOR 
HELL, and so he will NOT interfere with the ego's ILLUSION of 
Heaven, which it offered him TO INTERFERE WITH HEAVEN. 
Yet 
if ALL illusions are of fear, and they CAN be of nothing else, the il¬ 
lusion of Heaven is nothing more than an ATTRACTIVE form of 
fear, in which the guilt is buried deep, and rises in the form of 
"love." 

T 16 F 9. 
The appeal of hell lies ONLY in the terrible attraction of 
guilt, which the ego holds out to those who place their faith in little¬ 
ness. 
The conviction of littleness lies in EVERY special relationship, 
for only the deprived COULD value specialness. 
The " DEMAND " 
for specialness, and the perception of the GIVING of specialness AS 
AN ACT OF LOVE, would MAKE LOVE HATEFUL. 
And the REAL 
purpose of the special relationship, in strict accordance with the 
ego's goals, is to DESTROY reality and SUBSTITUTE ILLUSION. 


For the ego is ITSELF an illusion, and ONLY illusions can BE the 
witnesses to its reality. 


T 16 F10 . 
If you perceived the special relationship as a triumph over 
God, WOULD YOU WANT IT? Let us not think of its fearful nature, 
nor of the guilt it MUST entail, nor of the sadness and the loneliness. 

For these are only ATTRIBUTES of the whole religion of the separa¬ 
tion, and the total T(619) -446 context in which it is thought to occur. 

The central theme in its litany to sacrifice is that GOD MUST DIE SO 
YOU CAN LIVE. 
And it is this theme that is acted out in the special 
relationship. 
Through the death of YOUR self, you think you can 
ATTACK another self, and snatch it FROM the other, to REPLACE 
the self that you despised. 
And you despise it BECAUSE YOU DO 
NOT THINK IT OFFERS YOU THE SPECIALNESS THAT YOU 
DEMAND. 
And, HATING it, YOU have made it little and unwor¬ 
thy, BECAUSE YOU ARE AFRAID OF IT. 


T 16 F 11. 
How can you grant unlimited power to what you think you 
have ATTACKED? For so fearful has the truth become that, 

UNLESS it is weak, and little, and unworthy of value, you would 
not dare to look upon it. 
You think it safer to endow the little self 
which YOU have made, with power you WRESTED FROM truth. 



575 


1-565 



Volume I Text 


triumphing over it, and leaving IT helpless. 
See how EXACTLY is 
this ritual enacted in the special relationship. 
An altar is erected IN 
BETWEEN two separate people, on which each seeks to kill his self, 
and on his body, raise another self that TAKES HIS POWER FROM 
ITS DEATH. 


T 16 F 12. 
Over and over and over, this ritual is enacted. 
And it is 
NEVER completed, nor ever will BE completed. 
For the RITUAL of 
completion CANNOT complete, and life arises not from death, nor 
Heaven from hell. 
Whenever ANY form of special relationship 
tempts you to seek for love in ritual, remember love is CONTENT, 
and NOT form of ANY kind. 
The special relationship is a RITUAL 
OF FORM, aimed at the raising of the form to take the place of God, 
at the EXPENSE of content. 
There IS no meaning in the form, AND 
THERE WILL NEVER BE. 
The special relationship MUST be recog¬ 
nized for what it is; a senseless ritual, in which strength is extracted 
from the T(620) -447 death of God, and invested in His killer, as the 
sign that form has triumphed over content, and love has LOST its 
meaning. 


T 16 F13. 
Would you WANT this to be possible, even APART from its 
evident impossibility? For, if it WERE possible, you would have 
made YOURSELF helpless. 
God is not angry. 
He merely could not 
let this happen. 
You can NOT change His Mind. 
No rituals that you 
have set up, in which the dance of death delights you, can bring 
death to the Eternal. 
Nor can your chosen substitute for the Whole¬ 
ness of God, have ANY influence at all upon It. 
See in the special 
relationship nothing more than a meaningless attempt to raise other 
gods before Him, and, by worshipping them, to obscure THEIR 
tininess, AND HIS GREATNESS . 
592 

T 16 F 14. 
In the name of YOUR completion, you do not WANT this. 

And every idol that you raise to place BEFORE Him, stands before 
YOU, in place of what YOU are. 
Salvation lies in the simple fact that 
illusions are NOT fearful, BECAUSE THEY ARE NOT TRUE. 
And 
they but SEEM to be fearful to the extent to which you fail to recog- 


5,2 Exodus 20:3 You shall have no other gods before Me. 



1-566 


576 



Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


nize them FOR WHAT THEY ARE. 
And you WILL fail to do this, to 
the extent to which you WANT them to be true. 
And, to the same 
extent, you are DENYING truth, and so are making YOURSELF un¬ 
able to make the simple choice between truth and illusion, fantasy 
and God. 


T 16 F 15. 
Remember this, and you will have no difficulty in perceiv¬ 
ing the decision as just what it IS, and nothing more. 
The core of the 
separation delusion lies simply in the fantasy DESTRUCTION of 
love's meaning. 
And, unless its meaning is RESTORED to you, you 
CANNOT know yourself, who SHARE its meaning. 
Separation is 
only the decision NOT to know yourself. 
Its whole thought-system 
is a carefully-contrived learning experience, designed to lead AWAY 
from truth, and into fantasy. 
T(621) -448 Yet, for every learning that 
would hurt you, God offers you correction, and COMPLETE escape 
from ALL its consequences. 


T 16 F 16. 
The decision whether or not to listen to this course and fol¬ 
low it, is but the choice between truth and illusion. 
For here IS truth, 
SEPARATED from illusion, and NOT confused with it at all. 
How 
simple does this choice become when it is perceived as only what it 
is. 
For ONLY fantasies made confusion in choosing possible, and 
they are totally UNreal. 
This year is thus the time to make the EASI¬ 
EST decision that ever confronted you, and also the ONLY one. 
You 
will cross the bridge into reality, simply because you will recognize 
that God is on the other side AND NOTHING AT ALL IS HERE. 
It 
is impossible NOT to make the natural decision, as this is realized. 

T(622) - 449 - 593 

T 16 G. 
The Bridge to the Real World (Notes 1382 9:219) 

T 16 G1 . 
The search for the special relationship is the sign that you 
equate your self with the ego, and NOT with God. 
For the special 
relationship has value ONLY to the ego. 
To IT, UNLESS a relation¬ 
ship HAS special value, IT HAS NO MEANING. 
And it perceives 
ALL love as special. 
Yet, this CANNOT be natural, for it is UNlike 


593 January 7, 1967. 



577 


1-567 



Volume I Text 


the relationship of God and His Son, and ALL relationships that are 
unlike this One, MUST be unnatural. 
For God created love as He 
would have it be, and GAVE it as it IS. 
Love HAS no meaning ex¬ 
cept as its Creator defined it, by His Will. 
It is impossible to define it 
otherwise, and UNDERSTAND it. 


T 16 G 2. 
LOVE IS FREEDOM. 
To look for it by placing yourself in 
BONDAGE, is to SEPARATE yourself from it. 
For the love of God, 
no longer seek for union in separation, nor for freedom in bondage! 
As you release, so will you BE released. 
FORGET THIS NOT, or love 
will be unable to find you, and comfort you. 
There is a way in which 
the Holy Spirit asks YOUR help, if you would have His. 
The holy 
instant is His most helpful tool in protecting you from the attraction 
of guilt, the REAL lure in the special relationship. 
You do NOT rec¬ 
ognize that this IS its REAL appeal, for the ego has taught you that 
FREEDOM lies in it. 


T 16 G 3. 
Yet, the closer you look at the special relationship, the more 
apparent it becomes that it MUST foster guilt, and therefore must 
IMPRISON. 
The special relationship is totally without meaning 
WITHOUT A BODY. 
And, if you VALUE it, you must also VALUE 
THE BODY. 
And what you value, you WILL keep. 
The special rela¬ 
tionship is a device for limiting YOUR self to a body, and for limit¬ 
ing your perception of others to THEIRS. 
The Great Rays would es¬ 
tablish the total LACK of value of the special relationship, IF THEY 
WERE SEEN. 
For, in seeing THEM, the body WOULD disappear, 
BECAUSE ITS VALUE WOULD BE LOST. 
And so your whole IN¬ 
VESTMENT in seeing it would be WITHDRAWN from it. 


T 16 G 4. 
YOU SEE THE WORLD YOU VALUE. 
On this side of the 
bridge, you see T(623) - 450 - the world of separate bodies, seeking to 
join each other in SEPARATE UNIONS, and to become one BY LOS¬ 
ING. 
When two INDIVIDUALS seek to become ONE, they are try¬ 
ing to DECREASE their magnitude. 
Each would DENY his power, 
for the SEPARATE union EXCLUDES THE UNIVERSE. 
Far more is 
LEFT OUTSIDE than would be taken in. 
For God is left WITHOUT, 
and NOTHING taken in. 
If one such union were made IN PERFECT 
FAITH, the universe WOULD enter into it. 
Yet the special relation- 


1-568 


578 


PROOF 


COPY 


Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


ship which the EGO seeks, does NOT include even ONE whole in¬ 
dividual. 
For the ego WANTS but part of him, and sees ONLY this 
part, and nothing else. 


T 16 G 5. 
Across the bridge, it is so different! For a time the body is 
still seen, but NOT exclusively, as it is seen here. 
For the little spark 
that holds the Great Rays within it, is ALSO visible, and this spark 
cannot be limited long to littleness. 
Once you have crossed the 
bridge, the VALUE of the body is so diminished in YOUR sight, that 
you will see no need at all to MAGNIFY it. 
For you will realize that 
the ONLY value that the body has, is to enable you to bring your 
brothers TO the bridge WITH you. 
And to be RELEASED TO¬ 
GETHER there. 


T 16 G 6. 
The bridge itself is nothing more than a transition in your 
PERSPECTIVE of reality. 
On this side, everything you see is grossly 
distorted, and COMPLETELY out of perspective. 
What IS little and 
insignificant is magnified, and what is strong and powerful, cut 
down to littleness. 
In the transition, there is a period of confusion, in 
which a sense of actual disorientation seems to occur. 
But fear it not, 
for it means nothing more than that you have been willing to LET 
GO your hold on the distorted frame of reference, that SEEMED to 
hold your world together. 
This frame of reference is BUILT around 
the special relationship. 
Without THIS illusion, there can BE no 
meaning you would still seek here. 


T 16 G 7. 
Fear not that you will be abruptly lifted up, and hurled into 
reality. 
Time is kind, and, if you use it FOR reality, it will keep gen¬ 
tle pace with you, in your transition. 
The urgency is only in dislodg¬ 
ing T(624) - 451 - your minds from their FIXED POSITION here. 
This 
will not leave you homeless, and WITHOUT a frame of reference. 

The period of disorientation, which precedes the actual transition, is 
far shorter than the time it took to fix your minds so firmly on illu¬ 
sions. 
Delay will hurt you now MORE THAN BEFORE, ONLY be¬ 
cause you realize it IS delay, and that escape from pain IS REALLY 


579 


1-569 


Volume I Text 


POSSIBLE. 
Find hope and comfort, rather than despair, in this there¬ 
fore . 
594 

T 16 G 8. 
You could no longer find even the ILLUSION of love in 
ANY special relationship here. 
For you are no longer WHOLLY in¬ 
sane, and you WOULD recognize the guilt of SELF-betrayal FOR 
WHAT IT IS. 
Nothing you seek to strengthen, in the special rela¬ 
tionship, is REALLY part of you. 
And you cannot keep PART of the 
thought-system that taught you it WAS real, and understand the 
Thought that REALLY knows what you are. 
You HAVE allowed the 
Thought of your reality to enter your minds, and, because YOU in¬ 
vited it, it WILL abide with you . 
595 Your love for it will not allow 
you to betray yourself, and you COULD not enter into a relationship 
WHERE IT COULD NOT GO WITH YOU, for you would NOT be 
APART from it. 


T 16 G 9. 
Be glad you have escaped the mockery of salvation that the 
ego offered you, and look not back with longing on the travesty it 
made of your relationships. 
Now, no-one need suffer, for you have 
come too far to yield to the illusion of the beauty and holiness of 
guilt. 
Only the wholly insane could look on death and suffering, 
sickness and despair, and see it thus. 
What guilt has wrought is 
ugly, fearful, and very dangerous. 
See no illusion of truth and 
beauty there. 
And be you thankful that there IS a place where truth 
and beauty wait for you. 


T 16 G 10. 
Go on to meet them gladly, and learn how much awaits 
you, for the simple willingness to give up nothing, BECAUSE it is 


3,4 Well this one is tricky. 
The Urtext manuscript has “this:” and not the word “therefore.” In later 
versions the editors leave the colon but remove the paragraph break which would be most inappropriate 
after a colon. 
The Notes has a paragraph break specifically written in, however, making it difficult to 
suppose the paragraph break was an oversight. 
Just prior to the indicated paragraph break is a most 
unusual construction. 
It may have a colon followed by a period ... 
very odd ... 
or a slightly warped 
glyph for “therefore.” Since neither a colon followed by a paragraph break nor a colon followed by a 
period work at all well, while “therefore” works just fine, that might well be what was intended. 
The 
“this” then refers back to what was just discussed and not forward to what follows, which does seem 
more suitable in the context. 


595 John 15:4 “Abide in Me, and I in you. 
As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it abides in 
the vine, neither can you, unless you abide in Me.” 

John 15:10 “If you keep My commandments, you will abide in My love, just as I have kept My 
Father’s commandments and abide in His love.” 


1-570 


580 



Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


nothing. 
The new perspective you will gain, from crossing over, will 
be the understanding of WHERE HEAVEN IS. 
From HERE, it seems 
to be outside, and ACROSS the bridge. 
But, as you cross to JOIN it, 
IT will JOIN WITH YOU, and BECOME ONE with you. 
And you 
will think, in glad astonishment, that for all this, YOU GAVE T(625) - 
452 - UP NOTHING! The joy of Heaven, which HAS no limit, is IN¬ 
CREASED with each light that returns, to take its rightful place 
within it. 
Wait no longer, for the Love of God and YOU. 
And may 
the holy instant speed you on the way, as it will surely do, if you but 
LET it come to you. 


T 16 G ll. 
The Holy Spirit asks only this little help of you. 
Whenever 
your thoughts wander to a special relationship which still AT¬ 
TRACTS you, enter with Him into a holy instant, and there, LET 
HIM RELEASE YOU. 
He needs only your willingness to SHARE His 
perspective, to give it to you completely. 
And your willingness need 
not be complete, BECAUSE HIS IS PERFECT. 
It is His task to atone 
for your UNwillingness by His perfect faith. 
And it is HIS faith you 
share with Him there. 
Out of YOUR recognition of your UNwilling¬ 
ness for your release. 
His PERFECT willingness is GIVEN you. 
Call 
upon Him, for Heaven is at His call. 
And LET Him call on Heaven 
FOR you. 
T(626) - 453 - 

T 16 H. 
The End of Illusions (Notes 1389 9:227) 

T 16 H1. 
It 596 is impossible to let the past go, WITHOUT relinquishing 
the special relationship. 
For the special relationship is an attempt to 
RE-ENACT the past, AND CHANGE IT. 
Imagined slights, remem¬ 
bered pain, past disappointments, perceived injustices and depriva¬ 
tions, all enter into the special relationship, which becomes a way in 
which you seek to restore your wounded SELF-esteem. 
What basis 
would you have for choosing a special partner, WITHOUT the past? 
EVERY such choice is made because of something "evil" in the past, 
TO WHICH YOU CLING, and for which must SOMEONE ELSE 
"atone." 


596 January 10, 1967. 



581 


1-571 



Volume I Text 


T 16 H 2. 
The special relationship TAKES VENGEANCE ON THE 
PAST. 
By seeking to remove suffering IN THE PAST, it OVER¬ 
LOOKS the present, in its preoccupation with the past, and its TO¬ 
TAL COMMITMENT to it. 
NO SPECIAL RELATIONSHIP IS EX¬ 
PERIENCED IN THE PRESENT. 
Shades of the past envelop it, and 
make it what it is. 
It HAS no meaning in the present, and, if it means 
nothing NOW, it cannot have any REAL meaning at all. 
How can 
you change the past, EXCEPT in fantasy? And who can give you 
what you think THE PAST deprived you of? The past is nothing. 
Do 
not seek to lay the blame for deprivation on it, for the past IS GONE. 

T 16 H 3. 
You cannot REALLY not let go what has ALREADY gone. 
It 
MUST be, therefore, that YOU are maintaining the illusion that it 
has NOT gone, because you think it serves some purpose that you 
WANT FULFILLED. 
And it must also be that this purpose COULD 
NOT BE FULFILLED IN THE PRESENT, but ONLY in the past. 
Do 
not underestimate the intensity of the ego's drive for vengeance on 
the past. 
It is COMPLETELY savage, and COMPLETELY insane. 
For 
the ego remembers everything that YOU have done that offended it, 
and seeks retribution OF YOU. 
The fantasies it brings to the special 
relationships it chooses, in which to act out its hate, are fantasies of 
YOUR destruction. 


T 16 H 4. 
For the ego holds the past AGAINST YOU, and, in your ES¬ 
CAPE from T(627) - 454 - it, it sees ITSELF deprived of the vengeance it 
believes that you so justly merit. 
Yet, without your ALLIANCE in 
your own destruction, the ego could not hold you to the past. 
In the 
special relationship, YOU ARE ALLOWING YOUR DESTRUCTION 
TO BE. 
That this is insane, is obvious. 
But what is LESS obvious to 
you, is that the PRESENT is useless to you, while you pursue the 
ego's goal, as its ally. 
The past is gone; seek not to preserve it in the 
special relationship, which binds you to it, and would teach you that 
SALVATION is past, and that you must RETURN to the past, to 
FIND salvation. 
There is NO fantasy that does not contain the 
dream of retribution for the past. 
Would you ACT OUT the dream, 
or let it go? 


1-572 


582 


Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


T 16 H 5. 
In the special relationship, it does not SEEM to be an acting 
out of vengeance that you seek. 
And, even when the hatred and the 
savagery break briefly through into awareness, the illusion of love is 
not profoundly shaken. 
But the one thing that the ego NEVER al¬ 
lows to reach awareness, is that the special relationship is the acting 
out of VENGEANCE ON YOURSELF. 
Yet what else COULD it be? 
In seeking the special relationship, you look not for glory IN YOUR¬ 
SELF. 
You have DENIED that it is there. 
And the relationship be¬ 
comes your SUBSTITUTE for it. 
And vengeance becomes YOUR 
substitute for Atonement, and ESCAPE from vengeance becomes 
your LOSS. 


T 16 H 6. 
Against the ego's insane notion of salvation, the Holy Spirit 
gently lays the holy instant. 
We said before that the Holy Spirit must 
teach through comparisons, and uses opposites to point to truth. 


The holy instant is the OPPOSITE of the ego's fixed belief in salva¬ 
tion through vengeance for the past. 
In the holy instant, it is AC¬ 
CEPTED that the past is gone, and WITH its passing, the drive for 
vengeance HAS BEEN uprooted, and has disappeared. 
The stillness 
and the peace of NOW, enfold you in perfect gentleness. 
Everything 
is gone, EXCEPT THE TRUTH. 


T 16 H 7. 
For a time, you may attempt to bring illusions INTO the 
holy instant, to hinder your full awareness of the COMPLETE DIF¬ 
FERENCE, in ALL respects, between your EXPERIENCE of truth 
and illusion. 
But you will not T(628) - 455 - attempt this long. 
In the 
holy instant, the power of the Holy Spirit WILL prevail, BECAUSE 
YOU JOINED HIM. 
The illusions you bring with you, will weaken 
the EXPERIENCE of Him for a while, and will prevent you from 
KEEPING the experience in your mind. 
Yet the holy instant IS eter¬ 
nal, and your illusions of time will NOT prevent the timeless from 
being what it is, nor you from EXPERIENCING it as it is. 


T 16 H 8. 
What God has given you is truly given. 
AND WILL BE 
TRULY RECEIVED. 
For God's gifts HAVE no reality, APART from 
your receiving them. 
YOUR receiving completes HIS giving. 
You 
will receive, BECAUSE it is His Will to give. 
He gave the holy in¬ 
stant, to be given you. 
And it is impossible that you receive it not. 



583 


1-573 


Volume I Text 


BECAUSE He gave it. 
When He willed that His Son be free. 
His Son 
WAS free. 
In the holy instant is His reminder that His Son will AL¬ 
WAYS be EXACTLY as he was created. 
And EVERYTHING the 
Holy Spirit teaches you, is to remind you that you HAVE received 
what God has given you. 


T 16 H 9. 
There is nothing you CAN hold against reality. 
All that must 
be forgiven are the ILLUSIONS you have held against your broth¬ 
ers. 
Their reality HAS no past, and ONLY illusions can BE forgiven. 

God holds nothing against ANYONE, for He is INCAPABLE of illu¬ 
sions of ANY kind. 
Release your brothers from the slavery of THEIR 
illusions, by forgiving them for the illusions which YOU perceive in 
them. 
597 Thus will you learn that YOU have been forgiven, for it is 
YOU who offered THEM illusions. 
In the holy instant, this is done 
for you IN TIME, to bring to you the true condition of Heaven. 


T 16 H 10. 
Remember that you ALWAYS choose between truth and 
illusion, between the REAL Atonement that would heal, and the 
ego's "atonement," that would destroy. 
The power of God, and all 
His Love, without limit, will support you, as you seek only your 
place in the plan of Atonement arising from His Love. 
Be an ally of 
God, and NOT the ego, in seeking how Atonement can come to you. 

His help suffices, for His Messenger understands T(629) - 456 - how to 
restore the Kingdom TO you, and to place ALL your investment in 
salvation in your relationship with Him. 
598 

T 16 H 11 . 
Seek and FIND His message in the holy instant, where ALL 
illusions are forgiven. 
From here the miracle extends to bless every¬ 
one, and to resolve ALL problems; be they perceived as great or 
small, possible or impossible. 
There is NOTHING that will not give 
place to Him, and to His Majesty. 
To join in close relationship with 
Him, is to accept relationships AS REAL. 
And, through THEIR real¬ 
ity, give over ALL illusions, for the reality of your relationship with 


31,7 John 20:23 “If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you retain the sins of any, they 
are retained.” 

98 2 Corinthians 12:9 And He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made 
perfect in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of 
Christ may rest upon me. 



1-574 


584 



Chapter 16 - The Forgiveness of Illusions 


God. 
Praise be to your relationship with Him, and to no other. 
The 
truth lies here, AND NOWHERE ELSE. 
You choose this, or NOTH¬ 
ING. 


T 16 H12. 
Forgive us our illusions. 
Father, and help us to accept our 
true relationship with You, in which there are NO illusions, and 
where none can ever enter. 
Our holiness is YOURS. 
What can there 
be in us that NEEDS forgiveness, when YOURS is perfect? The sleep 
of forgetfulness is only the unwillingness to remember YOUR for¬ 
giveness and Your Love. 
Let us not wander into temptation, for the 
temptation of the Son of God is NOT Your Will. 
And let us receive 
ONLY what YOU have given, and accept but this into the minds 
which You created, and which You love. 
599 Amen. 
T(630) -457 600 


599 Matthew 6:9 “After this manner therefore pray ye. 
Our Father who 
name. 
Thy kingdom come. 
Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth, 
bread. 
And forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors, 
tion, but deliver us from the evil one. 
” 

600 January 12, 1967 


art in heaven, Hallowed be thy 
Give us this day our daily 
And bring us not into tempta- 


PROOF 


585 


COPY 


1-575 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 17- Forgiveness and Healing 

T 17 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1397 9:234) 

T 17 A l. 
The betrayal of the Son of God lies only in illusions, and all 
his "sins" are but his own imagining. 
601 His REALITY is forever 
sinless. 
He need not be forgiven but AWAKENED. 
In his dreams he 
HAS betrayed himself, his brothers and his God. 
Yet what is done in 
dreams has not been REALLY done. 
It is impossible to convince the 
DREAMER that this is so, for dreams are what they are BECAUSE of 
their illusion of reality. 
Only in waking is the full release from them, 
for only then does it become PERFECTLY apparent that they had no 
effect on reality at all, AND DID NOT CHANGE IT. 


T 17 A 2. 
FANTASIES CHANGE REALITY. 
That is their purpose. 

They CANNOT do so IN reality, but they CAN do so in the mind 
that would HAVE REALITY DIFFERENT. 
It is, then, only your 
WISH to change reality that is fearful, because, by your wish you 
think you have ACCOMPLISHED what you wish. 
This strange posi¬ 
tion, in a sense, ACKNOWLEDGES your power, yet by DISTORT¬ 
ING it, and devoting it to 'evil/ it also MAKES IT UNREAL. 
You 
cannot be faithful to two masters, 602 who ask of you conflicting 
things. 
What you use in fantasy, you DENY to truth. 
But what you 
GIVE to truth, to use FOR you, is SAFE from fantasy. 


T 17 B. 
Fantasy and Distorted Perception (Notes 1398 9:235) 

T 17 B 1 . 
When you maintain that there MUST be order of difficulty in 
miracles, all you mean is that there are some things you would 
WITHHOLD from truth. 
You believe that truth cannot deal with 
them, ONLY because YOU would keep them FROM truth. 
Very 
simply, your lack of faith in the Power that heals ALL pain, arises 
from YOUR wish to retain some ASPECTS of reality FOR FAN¬ 
TASY. 
If you but realized what this MUST do to your appreciation 


601 Luke 22:48 But Jesus said to him, “Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?” 

602 Matthew 6:24 “No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or 
else he will hold to one, and despise the other. 
Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” 


1-576 


586 



Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


of the whole! What you RESERVE UNTO YOURSELF, you TAKE 
AWAY from Him Who would release you. 
Unless you GIVE IT 
BACK, it is inevitable that YOUR perspective on reality be warped 
and uncorrected. 
(631) -458 

T 17 B 2. 
As long as you would have this be, so long will the ILLU¬ 
SION of order of difficulty in miracles REMAIN with you. 
For YOU 
have established this order in REALITY, by giving some of it to one 
teacher, and some to another. 
And so you learn to deal with PART 
of truth in one way, and in ANOTHER way the OTHER part. 
To 
FRAGMENT truth is to DESTROY it by rendering it meaningless. 

ORDERS of reality is a perspective without understanding, a frame 
of reference FOR reality to which it cannot REALLY be compared at 
all. 
Think you that you can bring truth to fantasy, and learn what 
truth MEANS from the perspective of illusions? 

T 17 B 3. 
Truth HAS no meaning in illusion. 
The frame of reference 
FOR its meaning MUST BE ITSELF. 
When you try to bring TRUTH 
to illusions, you are trying to MAKE THEM REAL, and KEEP them 
by JUSTIFYING your belief in them. 
But to give illusions to Truth is 
to enable truth to teach that the ILLUSIONS are unreal, and thus 
enable you to ESCAPE from them. 
Reserve not one idea aside from 
truth, or you ESTABLISH orders of reality which MUST imprison 
you. 
There IS no order in reality because EVERYTHING there is 
true. 


T 17 B 4. 
Be willing, then, to give ALL you have held OUTSIDE the 
truth to Him Who KNOWS the truth, and in Whom all is brought to 
truth. 
Salvation from separation will be COMPLETE, or will not be 
at all. 
Be not concerned with anything except YOUR WILLINGNESS 
TO HAVE THIS BE ACCOMPLISHED. 
HE will accomplish it; not 
you. 
But forget not this; when you become disturbed and lose 
YOUR peace of mind because ANOTHER is attempting to solve his 
problems through fantasy, you are refusing to FORGIVE YOUR¬ 
SELF for just this same attempt. 
And you are holding BOTH of you 
AWAY from truth, and from salvation. 
As you FORGIVE him, you 


587 


1-577 


Volume I Text 


RESTORE to truth what was denied by BOTH OF YOU. 
And you 
WILL see forgiveness where YOU have given it. 
T(632) - 459 - 603 

T 17 C. 
The Forgiven World (Notes 1401 9:238) 

T 17 C 1. 
Can you imagine how beautiful those you forgive will look 
to you? In no fantasy have you ever seen anything so lovely. 
Noth¬ 
ing you see here, sleeping or waking, comes near to such loveliness, 
and nothing will you value like unto this, nor hold so dear. 
Nothing 
that you remember, that made your heart seem to sing with joy, has 
ever brought you even a little part of the happiness this sight will 
bring you. 
FOR YOU WILL SEE THE SON OF GOD. 
You will be¬ 
hold the beauty that the Holy Spirit loves to look upon, and that He 
thanks the Father for. 
He was created to see this FOR YOU, until 
you learned to see it for yourself. 
And all His teaching leads to see¬ 
ing it and giving thanks with Him. 


T 17 C 2. 
This loveliness is NOT a fantasy. 
It is the real world, bright, 
and clean and new, with everything sparkling under the open sun. 

Nothing is hidden here, for everything has BEEN forgiven, and 
there ARE no fantasies to hide the truth. 
The bridge between that 
world and this is SO little and SO easy to cross that you could not 
believe it is the meeting-place of worlds so different. 
Yet this little 
bridge is the strongest thing that touches on this world at all. 
This 
little step, so small it has escaped your notice, is a stride through 
time into eternity, and beyond all ugliness, into beauty that will en¬ 
chant you, and will never cease to cause you wonderment at its per¬ 
fection. 


T 17 C 3. 
This step, the smallest ever taken by anything, is still the 
greatest accomplishment of all, in God's plan of Atonement. 
All else 
is learned, but THIS is GIVEN, complete and wholly perfect. 
No-one 
but Him Who PLANNED salvation could complete it thus. 
The real 
world, in its loveliness, YOU learn to reach. 
Fantasies are all un¬ 
done, no-one and nothing remains still bound by them, and, by 
YOUR OWN forgiveness, you are FREE TO T(633) - 460 - SEE. 
And 


January 13, 1967 


1-578 


588 



Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


WHAT you see is only what YOU HAVE MADE, with the blessing 
of your forgiveness on it. 
And, with this final blessing of God's Son 
UPON HIMSELF, the REAL perception, born of the new perspective 
he has learned, has served its purpose. 


T 17 C 4. 
The stars will disappear in light, and the sun, which opened 
up the world to beauty, will vanish. 
Perception will be meaningless, 
when it has been perfected. 
For everything that has been used for 
learning, will have no function. 
Nothing will ever change; no shifts 
nor shadings, no differences, no variations that made perception 
possible, will occur. 
The perception of the real world will be so 
short, that you will barely have time to thank God for it. 
For God 
will take the last step swiftly, when you have reached the real 
world, and have been made ready for Him. 


T 17 C 5. 
The real world is attained simply by the COMPLETE for¬ 
giveness of the old; the world you see WITHOUT forgiveness. 
The 
Great Transformer of perception will undertake WITH you the care¬ 
ful searching of the mind that MADE this world, and uncover TO 
YOU the SEEMING reasons for your making it. 
In the light of the 
REAL reason that He brings, as you follow Him, He will SHOW you 
that there is NO reason here at all. 
Each spot HIS reason touches, 
grows alive with beauty. 
And what SEEMED ugly, in the darkness 
of your LACK of reason, is suddenly released to loveliness. 
Not 
even what the Son of God made in insanity, could be without a hid¬ 
den spark of beauty, that gentleness could release. 


T 17 C 6. 
All this beauty will rise to bless your sight, as you look upon 
the world with forgiving eyes. 
For forgiveness literally TRANS¬ 
FORMS vision, and lets you see the real world, reaching quietly and 
gently across chaos, and removing all illusions that had twisted 
your perception, and fixed it on the T(634) - 461 - past. 
The smallest 
leaf becomes a thing of wonder, and a blade of grass a sign of God's 
perfection. 
From the forgiven world, the Son of God is lifted easily 
to his home. 
And there, he knows that he has ALWAYS rested there 
in peace. 



589 


1-579 


Volume I Text 


T 17 C 7. 
Even salvation will become a dream, and vanish from his 
mind. 
For salvation IS the end of dreams, and, with the closing of 
the dream, will have no meaning. 
Who, awake in Heaven, COULD 
dream that there could ever be NEED of salvation? How much do 
you WANT salvation? It will GIVE you the real world, trembling 
with readiness to BE given you. 
The eagerness of the Holy Spirit to 
give you this, is so intense He would not wait, although He waits in 
patience. 
MEET His patience with your IMpatience at delay in meet¬ 
ing Him. 
Go out in gladness to meet with your Redeemer, and walk 
with Him, in trust, out of this world, and into the real world of 
beauty and forgiveness. 
T(635) - 462 - 604 

T 17 D. 
Shadows of the Past (Notes 1407 9:244) 

T 17 D l. 
To forgive is merely to remember ONLY the LOVING 
thoughts you gave in the past, and those that were given you. 
ALL 
the rest, must be forgotten. 
Forgiveness is a selective remembering, 
based NOT on YOUR selection. 
For the shadow figures YOU would 
make immortal, ARE 'enemies' of reality. 
Be willing to forgive the 
Son of God for what he did NOT do. 
The shadow figures are the 
witnesses you bring WITH you, to demonstrate he DID what he 
DID NOT. 
BECAUSE you brought them, YOU WILL HEAR THEM. 

And you who KEPT them BY YOUR OWN SELECTION, do NOT 
understand how they came into your minds, and what their pur¬ 
pose is. 


T 17 D 2. 
THEY REPRESENT THE EVIL THAT YOU THINK WAS 
DONE TO YOU. 
You bring them with you ONLY that you may "re¬ 
turn" evil FOR evil, hoping that THEIR witness will enable you to 
think guiltily of another, and NOT harm yourself. 
They speak so 
clearly for the separation, that no-one NOT obsessed with KEEPING 
separation, COULD hear them otherwise. 
They offer you the 'rea¬ 
sons' why you should enter into unholy alliances, which support the 
ego's goals, and make your relationships the witness to ITS power. 


It is these shadow figures which would MAKE THE EGO HOLY in 


604 January 15, 1967. 



1-580 


590 



Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 

your sight, and teach you what you do to keep IT safe, is really 
LOVE. 


T 17 D 3. 
The shadow figures ALWAYS speak for vengeance, and 
ALL relationships into which they enter, are totally insane. 
WITH¬ 
OUT EXCEPTION, these relationships have, AS THEIR PURPOSE, 
the EXCLUSION of the truth about the other, AND OF YOURSELF. 

That is why you see, IN BOTH what is not there, and MAKE of both 
the slaves of vengeance. 
And why whatever reminds you of your 
PAST grievances, no matter how distorted the associations by which 
you ARRIVE at the remembrance may be, ATTRACTS you, and 
seems to you to go by the name of love. 
And, finally, why all such 
relationships become the attempt at union THROUGH THE BODY, 
for ONLY bodies CAN be seen as means for vengeance. 


T 17 D 4. 
That bodies are central to all unholy relationships is evident. 

Your OWN experience has taught you this. 
But what you do NOT 
realize, are T(636) - 463 - ALL the reasons that go to MAKE the rela¬ 
tionship unholy. 
For UNholiness seeks to RE-INFORCE itself, by 
gathering TO itself, what it perceives as LIKE itself, as holiness does. 

In the unholy relationship, it is NOT the body of the OTHER with 
which union is attempted, but the bodies of those WHO ARE NOT 
THERE. 
Even the BODY of the other, ALREADY a severely limited 
perception of him, is NOT the central focus as it is, or in entirety. 

What can be used for fantasies of vengeance, and what can be most 
readily associated with those on whom vengeance is REALLY 
sought, are centered on, and SEPARATED OFF, as being the only 
parts OF VALUE. 


T 17 D 5. 
Every step taken in the making, the maintaining, and the 
breaking off of the unholy relationship, is a move toward further 
fragmentation and unreality. 
The shadow figures enter more and 
more, and the one in whom they SEEM to be, DECREASES in im¬ 
portance. 
Time is indeed unkind to the unholy relationship. 
For time 
IS cruel in the ego's hands, as it is kind when used for gentleness. 

The attraction of the unholy relationship begins to fade and to be 
questioned, almost at once. 
Once it is formed, doubt MUST enter in. 



591 


1-581 


Volume I Text 


because its purpose IS impossible. 
The only such relationships 
which RETAIN the fantasies which center on them, are the ones 
which have been DREAMED of, but have NOT been made at all. 


T 17 D 6. 
Where NO reality has entered, there is NOTHING to intrude 
upon the DREAM of happiness. 
But consider what this means; the 
more of the REALITY that enters into the unholy relationship, the 
LESS SATISFYING it becomes. 
And the more the FANTASIES can 
encompass, the greater the satisfaction seems to be. 
The 'ideal' of the 
unholy relationship thus becomes one in which the REALITY of the 
other does not ENTER AT ALL, to 'spoil' the dream. 
And the LESS 
the other REALLY brings to it, the 'better' it becomes. 
Thus, the at¬ 
tempt at union becomes a way of EXCLUDING even the one with 
whom the union was sought. 
For it was FORMED to GET HIM OUT 
OF IT, and join with fantasies in uninterrupted 'bliss.' T(637) - 464 - 
T 17 D 7. 
How can the Holy Spirit bring HIS interpretation of the 
body, as a means of communicating into relationships whose ONLY 
purpose is SEPARATION from reality? What forgiveness IS, enables 
Him to do so. 
If all but loving thoughts have been forgotten, what 
remains IS eternal, and the TRANSFORMED past is made LIKE 
THE PRESENT. 
No longer does the past CONFLICT with now. 


THIS continuity EXTENDS the present, by increasing its reality, 
AND ITS VALUE, in your perception of it. 
In these loving thoughts 
is the spark of beauty, hidden in the ugliness of the unholy relation¬ 
ship in which the HATRED is remembered, yet there to COME 
ALIVE as the relationship is given to Him Who GIVES it life and 
beauty. 


T 17 D 8. 
That is why Atonement centers ON THE PAST, which is the 
SOURCE of separation, and where it must be undone. 
For separa¬ 
tion must be corrected WHERE IT WAS MADE. 
The EGO seeks to 
'resolve' ITS problems, NOT at their source, but where they were 
NOT made. 
And thus it seeks to guarantee there WILL be no solu¬ 
tion. 
The Holy Spirit wills only to make HIS resolutions complete 
and perfect. 
And so He seeks and FINDS the source of problems 
WHERE IT IS, and there UNDOES it. 
And, with each step in HIS 


1-582 


592 


Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


undoing, is the SEPARATION more and more undone, and UNION 
brought closer. 
HE is not at all confused by ANY 'reasons' for sepa¬ 
ration. 
ALL He perceives in it is that it MUST BE UNDONE. 


T 17 D 9. 
Let Him uncover the hidden spark of beauty in your rela¬ 
tionships, and SHOW it to you. 
Its loveliness will so attract you, that 
you will be unwilling ever to lose the sight of it again. 
And you will 
LET it transform the relationship, so you can see it more and more. 

For you will want it more and more, and become increasingly un¬ 
willing to LET it be hidden from you. 
And you will learn to seek for, 
and ESTABLISH, conditions in which this, beauty CAN be seen. 
All 
this you will do gladly, if you but let Him hold the spark before you, 
to light your way, and make it CLEAR to you. 


T 17 D 10 . 
God's Son is one. 
And whom God has JOINED as one, the 
ego CANNOT break apart. 
605 The spark of holiness MUST be safe, 
however hidden it may be, T(638) - 465 -in EVERY relationship. 
For the 
Creator of the one relationship, has LEFT no part of it without HIM¬ 
SELF. 
THIS is the only part of the relationship the Holy Spirit sees, 
because He knows that ONLY this is true. 
YOU have made the rela¬ 
tionship unreal, and THEREFORE unholy, by seeing it WHERE it is 
not, and as it IS not. 
Give the past to Him Who can change YOUR 
mind about it, FOR you. 
But first, be SURE you fully realize what 
YOU have made the past to REPRESENT, and why. 


T 17 D 11. 
In brief, the past is NOW your justification for entering into 
a continuing, unholy alliance with the ego AGAINST THE PRE¬ 
SENT. 
For the present IS forgiveness. 
Therefore, the relationships 
which the unholy alliance dictates are not perceived NOR FELT as 
now. 
Yet the frame of reference to which the present is REFERRED 
for meaning, is an ILLUSION of the past, in which those elements 
which FIT the purpose of the unholy alliance are retained and ALL 
THE REST LET GO. 
And what is thus let go, is all the truth the past 


605 Matthew 19:6 “So that they are no more two, but one flesh. 
What therefore God hath joined to- 
gether, let not man put asunder.” 


593 


1-583 



Volume I Text 


could ever OFFER to the present, as witnesses for ITS reality, while 
what is KEPT, but witnesses to the reality of dreams. 


T 17 D 12. 
It is still up to you to choose to be willing to join with truth 
or illusion. 
But remember that to choose ONE, is to LET THE 
OTFIER GO. 
Which one you choose, YOU will endow with beauty 
and reality, because the choice DEPENDS on which you value more. 

The spark of beauty, or the veil of ugliness; the real world, or the 
world of guilt and fear; truth or illusion; freedom or slavery, - it is 
all the same. 
For you can NEVER choose EXCEPT between God and 
the ego. 
Thought-systems are but true or false, and all their AT¬ 
TRIBUTES come simply from what they ARE. 
Only the Thoughts of 
God ARE true. 
And all that follows FROM them, COMES FROM 
what they are, and is as true as is the holy Source from which they 
come. 


T 17 D 13. 
My holy brothers, I would enter into all your relationships, 
and step between you and your fantasies. 
Let MY relationship to 
you be REAL to you, and let me bring REALITY to your perception 
of your brothers. 
They (639) - 466 -were not created to enable you to 
F1URT yourselves through them. 
They were created to CREATE 
with you. 
This is the truth that I would interpose, between you and 
your goal of madness. 
Be not separate from me, and let not the holy 
purpose of Atonement be lost to you, in dreams of vengeance. 
Rela¬ 
tionships in which such dreams are cherished have EXCLUDED me. 

Let me enter, in the Name of God, and bring YOU peace, that YOU 
may offer peace to me. 
T(640) -467 606 

T 17 E. 
Perception and the Two Worlds (Notes 1416 9:253) 

T 17 E l. 
God established His relationship with you TO MAKE YOU 
HAPPY, and nothing YOU do which does NOT share His purpose 
CAN be real. 
The purpose GOD ascribed to anything IS its only 
function. 
Because of HIS reason for creating HIS relationship with 
you, the function of relationships became forever "to make happy." 
AND NOTHING ELSE. 
To fulfill this function, you relate to your 


606 January 17, 1967 


1-584 


594 



Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


creations as GOD to HIS. 
For nothing God created is APART from 
happiness, and nothing God created but would EXTEND happiness, 
as its Creator did. 
Whatever fulfills this function NOT, CANNOT BE 
REAL. 


T 17 E 2. 
In this world, it is impossible to create. 
Yet it IS possible to 
make happy. 
We have said repeatedly that the Holy Spirit would 
not DEPRIVE you of your special relationships, but would TRANS¬ 
FORM them. 
And by that, all that is meant is that He will RESTORE 
to them the function that was GIVEN them, by God. 
The function 
YOU have given them is clearly NOT to make happy. 
But the holy 
relationship SHARES God's purpose, rather than aiming to make a 
SUBSTITUTE for it. 
Every special relationship that YOU have made 
IS a substitute for God's Will, and glorifies yours instead of His, 
BECAUSE OF THE DELUSION THEY ARE DIFFERENT. 


T 17 E 3. 
You have VERY REAL relationships, even in this world, 
which you do not recognize, simply because you have raised their 
SUBSTITUTES to such predominance that, when truth calls to you, 
as it does constantly, YOU ANSWER WITH A SUBSTITUTE. 
Every 
special relationship which you have ever undertaken has, as its fun¬ 
damental purpose, the aim of occupying your minds so completely 
that YOU WILL NOT HEAR the call of truth. 
In a sense, the special 
relationship was the EGO's answer to the creation of the Holy Spirit, 
Who was God's Answer to the separation. 
For, although the ego did 

not understand WHAT had been created, it WAS aware of threat. 

T(641) -468 

T 17 E 4. 
The whole defense system that the ego evolved, to PRO¬ 
TECT the separation from the Holy Spirit, was in response to the 
Gift with which God blessed it, and BY His blessing enabled it to be 
HEALED. 
This Blessing holds, WITHIN ITSELF, the truth about 
everything. 
And the truth is that the Holy Spirit IS in close relation¬ 
ship with you, because, in Him, is your relationship with God re¬ 
stored to you. 
The relationship with Him has never been broken, 
because the Holy Spirit has not been separate from anyone SINCE 


595 


1-585 


Volume I Text 


the separation. 
And through Him, have all your holy relationships 
been carefully preserved, to serve God's purpose FOR you. 


T 17 E 5. 
The ego IS hyperalert to threat, and the part of your mind 
into which the ego was accepted is VERY anxious to preserve its 
reason, AS IT SEES IT. 
It does NOT realize that it is totally insane. 

And YOU must realize JUST WHAT THIS MEANS, if YOU would 
be restored to sanity. 
The insane PROTECT their thought systems, 
BUT THEY DO IT INSANELY. 
And ALL their defenses are AS IN¬ 
SANE AS WHAT THEY ARE SUPPOSED TO PROTECT. 
The sepa¬ 
ration has NOTHING in it, no PART, NO 'reason,' and NO attrib¬ 
ute, that is NOT insane. 
And its 'protection' IS part of it, as insane as 
the whole. 


T 17 E 6. 
The special relationship, which is its chief defense, MUST 
therefore be insane. 
You have but little difficulty now in realizing 
that the thought-system it protects, is but a system of delusions. 
You 
recognize, at least in general terms, that the ego is insane. 
But the 
special relationship still seems to you somehow TO BE DIFFERENT. 

Yet we have looked at it far closer than at many other ASPECTS of 
the ego's thought-system which you have been more willing to let 
go. 
While this ONE remains, you will not LET the others go. 
FOR 
THIS ONE IS NOT DIFFERENT. 
RETAIN this one, and you HAVE 
retained the whole. 
(642) -469 

T 17 E 7. 
It is essential to realize that ALL defenses DO what they 
would DEFEND. 
The underlying basis for their effectiveness is that 
they OFFER what they defend. 
What they defend is placed IN them 
for safe-keeping, and as THEY operate, THEY BRING IT TO YOU. 

Every defense operates BY GIVING GIFTS, and the gift is ALWAYS 
a miniature of the thought-system the defense protects, set in a 
golden frame. 
The frame is very elaborate, all set with jewels, and 
deeply carved and polished. 
Its purpose is to be of value IN ITSELF, 
and to divert YOUR attention from what it encloses. 
But the frame 
WITHOUT the picture, you CANNOT have. 
Defenses operate TO 
MAKE YOU THINK YOU CAN. 



1-586 


596 


Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


T 17 E 8. 
The special relationship has the most imposing and decep¬ 
tive frame of all the defenses the ego uses. 
Its thought-system is of¬ 
fered here, surrounded by a frame so heavy and so elaborate, that 
the picture is almost obliterated by its imposing structure. 
Into the 
frame are woven all sorts of fanciful and fragmented illusions of 
love, set with dreams of sacrifice and self-aggrandizement, and in¬ 
terlaced with gilded threads of self-destruction. 
The glitter of blood 
shines like rubies, and the tears are faceted like diamonds, and 
gleam in the dim light in which the offering is made. 


T 17 E 9. 
LOOK AT THE PICTURE. 
Do NOT let the frame distract 
you. 
This gift is given you for your damnation, and if you TAKE it, 
you WILL believe that you are damned. 
YOU CANNOT HAVE 
THE FRAME WITHOUT THE PICTURE. 
What you VALUE is the 
FRAME, for THERE you see no conflict. 
But the frame is only the 
wrapping for the GIFT of conflict. 
THE FRAME IS NOT THE GIFT. 

Be not deceived by the most superficial ASPECTS of this thought- 
system, for these aspects enclose the whole, complete with EVERY 
aspect. 
Death lies in this glittering gift. 
Let not your gaze dwell on 
the hypnotic gleaming of the frame. 
LOOK AT THE PICTURE, and 
realize that DEATH is offered you. 
T(643) -470 

T 17 E 10. 
That is why the holy instant is so important in the defense 
of truth. 
The truth itself NEEDS no defense, but YOU DO need de¬ 
fense against your own ACCEPTANCE of the gift of death. 
When 
you who ARE truth, accept an idea so DANGEROUS to truth, YOU 
THREATEN TRUTH WITH DESTRUCTION. 
And YOUR defense 
must now be undertaken, TO KEEP TRUTH WHOLE. 
The power of 
Heaven, the Love of God, the tears of Christ and the joy of His Eter¬ 
nal Spirit are marshalled to defend you from your own attack. 
For 
you attack THEM, being PART of them, and they must SAVE you, 
for they love themselves. 


T 17 E ll. 
The Holy instant is a miniature of Heaven, sent you FROM 
Heaven. 
It is a picture, too, set in a frame. 
But if you accept THIS 
gift, you will NOT see the frame at all, because the gift can only BE 
accepted through your willingness to focus ALL your attention ON 


597 


1-587 


Volume I Text 


THE PICTURE. 
The holy instant is a miniature of eternity. 
It is a pic¬ 
ture of timelessness, set in a frame of time. 
If you focus on the pic¬ 
ture, you will realize that it was only the frame that made you 
THINK it was a picture. 
WITHOUT the frame, the picture IS SEEN 
AS WHAT IT REPRESENTS. 
For, as the whole thought-system of 
the ego lies in ITS gifts, so the whole of Heaven lies in this instant, 
borrowed from eternity, and set in time for YOU. 
T(644) -471 
T 17 E 12. 
Two gifts are offered you. 
Each is complete, and cannot be 
partially accepted. 
Each is a picture of all that you can have, SEEN 
VERY DIFFERENTLY. 
You CANNOT compare their value by com¬ 
paring a picture to a frame. 
It MUST be the PICTURES ONLY that 
you compare, or the comparison is wholly without meaning. 
Re¬ 
member that it is the picture that is the gift. 
And ONLY on this basis 
are you REALLY free to choose. 
LOOK AT THE PICTURES. 
BOTH 
of them. 
One is a tiny picture, hard to see at all beneath the heavy 
shadows of its enormous and disproportionate enclosure. 
The other 
is lightly framed, and hung in light, lovely to look upon for what it 
IS. 


T 17 E 13. 
You who have tried so hard, and are STILL trying, to fit the 
better picture into the wrong frame, and so combine what cannot BE 
combined, accept this and be glad; These pictures are each framed 
perfectly, for what they represent. 
One is FRAMED to be out of fo¬ 
cus, and NOT seen. 
The other is framed for perfect clarity. 
The pic¬ 
ture of darkness and of death grows less convincing as you search it 
out amid its wrappings. 
As each senseless stone that SEEMS to shine 
in darkness from the frame is EXPOSED TO LIGHT, it becomes dull 
and lifeless, and ceases to distract you from the picture. 
And finally, 
you look upon the PICTURE ITSELF, seeing at last that, unprotected 
by its FRAME, it HAS no meaning. 


T 17 E 14. 
The other picture is lightly framed, for time cannot contain 
eternity. 
There is NO distraction here. 
The picture of Heaven and 
eternity grows MORE convincing, as you look at it. 
T(645) -472 And 
now, by REAL comparison, a TRANSFORMATION of both pictures 
can at last occur. 
And each is given its RIGHTFUL place, when both 


1-588 


598 


Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


are seen IN RELATION TO EACH OTHER. 
The dark picture, 
BROUGHT TO LIGHT, is NOT perceived as fearful. 
But the fact that 
IT IS JUST A PICTURE is brought home at last. 
And what you SEE 
there, YOU will recognize as what it is; a picture of what YOU 
THOUGHT WAS REAL, and nothing more. 
For, BEHIND this pic¬ 
ture, YOU WILL SEE NOTHING. 


T 17 E 15. 
The picture of light, in clear-cut and unmistakable contrast, 
is transformed into what lies BEYOND the picture. 
As you look on 
THIS, you realize that IT IS NOT A PICTURE, but a reality. 
This is 
no figured REPRESENTATION of a thought-system, but the 
Thought Itself. 
What IT represents is THERE. 
The frame fades gen¬ 
tly, and God rises to your remembrance, offering you the whole of 
creation, in exchange for your little picture, wholly without value, 
and entirely deprived of meaning. 
As God ascends into HIS rightful 
place and you to yours, you will experience again the MEANING of 
relationship, and know it to be true. 


T 17 E 16. 
Let us ascend, in peace together, to the Father, by giving 
HIM ascendance in our minds . 
607 We will gain EVERYTHING by 
giving HIM the power and the glory, and keeping NO illusions of 
where they are . 
608 They ARE in us, through HIS ascendance. 
What 
He has given is HIS. 
It shines in every part of Him, as in the Whole. 

The whole reality of your relationship with Him lies in OUR rela¬ 
tionship to one another. 
The holy instant shines alike on ALL rela¬ 
tionships, for in it, they ARE one. 
For here is only healing, AL¬ 
READY complete and perfect. 
For here is God, and where HE is, 
only the perfect and complete CAN be. 
(646) -473 609 


w17 John 20:17 Jesus said to her, “Do not cling to Me, for I have not yet ascended to My Father; but go 
to My brethren and say to them, “I am ascending to My Father and your Father, and to My God and 
your God.” 

608 Matthew 6:13 “And do not lead us into temptation, 

But deliver us from the evil one. 


For Yours is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever.” Amen. 


609 January 18, 1968 


599 


1-589 



Volume I Text 

T 17 F. 
The Healed Relationship (Notes 1427 9:264) 

T 17 F l. 
The holy relationship is the EXPRESSION of the holy instant, 
in living in this world. 
Like EVERYTHING about salvation, the holy 
instant is a PRACTICAL device, WITNESSED by its results. 
The 
holy instant NEVER fails. 
The EXPERIENCE of it is ALWAYS felt. 

But, without EXPRESSION, IT IS NOT REMEMBERED. 
The holy 
relationship is a constant reminder of the experience in which the 
relationship became what it is. 
And, as the UNholy relationship is a 
continuing hymn of hate in praise of ITS maker, so is the holy rela¬ 
tionship a happy song of praise to the REDEEMER of relationships. 

The holy relationship, a MAJOR step toward the perception of the 
real world, is LEARNED. 
It is the old, unholy relationship, trans¬ 
formed and seen anew. 


T 17 F 2. 
The holy relationship is a phenomenal teaching accom¬ 
plishment. 
In all its aspects, as it begins, develops, and becomes ac¬ 
complished, it represents the REVERSAL of the unholy relationship. 

Be comforted in this; The ONLY difficult phase is the beginning. 
For 
here, the GOAL of the relationship is abruptly shifted to the EXACT 
OPPOSITE of what it was. 
This is the FIRST result of OFFERING the 
relationship to the Holy Spirit, to use for HIS purposes. 
This invita¬ 
tion is ACCEPTED IMMEDIATELY, and the Holy Spirit wastes no 
time in introducing the practical results of asking Him to enter. 
AT 
ONCE, HIS goal REPLACES yours. 


T 17 F 3. 
This is accomplished very rapidly. 
But it makes the relation¬ 
ship seem disturbed, disjunctive and even quite distressing. 
The 
reason is quite clear. 
For the relationship, AS IT IS, is out of line with 
its own goal, and clearly unsuited to the purpose which has been 
ACCEPTED for it. 
In its UNholy condition, YOUR goal was all that 
SEEMED to give it meaning. 
Now, it seems to make NO sense. 


Many relationships have been broken off at this point, and the pur¬ 
suit of the old goal re-established in ANOTHER relationship. 
For, 
once the unholy relationship has ACCEPTED the goal of holiness, it 
can T(647) -474 never again be what it was. 



1-590 


600 


Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


T 17 F 4. 
The temptation of the ego becomes extremely intense, with 
this shift in goals. 
For the relationship has NOT, as yet, been 
changed sufficiently to make its former goal completely WITHOUT 
attraction, and its structure is 'threatened' by the recognition of its 
inappropriateness for meeting its new purpose. 
The conflict be¬ 
tween the goal and the structure of the relationship is SO apparent 
that they CANNOT co-exist. 
Yet now, THE GOAL WILL NOT BE 
CHANGED. 
Set firmly in the unholy relationship, there IS no course 
except to CHANGE THE RELATIONSHIP to fit the goal. 
Until this 
HAPPY solution is seen and accepted as the ONLY WAY OUT of 
this conflict, the RELATIONSHIP seems to be severely strained. 


T 17 F 5. 
It would NOT be kinder to shift the goal more slowly. 
For 
the CONTRAST would be obscured, and the ego given time to re¬ 
interpret each slow step, according to its liking. 
Only a radical shift 
in purpose COULD induce a COMPLETE change of mind about 
what the whole relationship IS FOR. 
As this change develops, and is 
finally accomplished, it grows increasingly beneficent and joyous. 

But, at the beginning, the situation is experienced as very precari¬ 
ous. 
A relationship, undertaken by two individuals for their unholy 
purposes, suddenly has HOLINESS for its goal. 


T 17 F 6. 
As these two CONTEMPLATE their relationship from the 
point of view of this new purpose, they are inevitably appalled. 

Their perception of the relationship may even become quite disor¬ 
ganized. 
And yet, the FORMER organization of their perception, no 
longer serves the purpose THEY have agreed to set. 
THIS IS THE 
TIME FOR FAITH. 
You LET this goal be set for you. 
That WAS an 
act of faith. 
Do not ABANDON faith, now that the REWARDS of 
faith are being introduced. 
If you believed the Holy Spirit was 
THERE to ACCEPT the relationship, why would you now not STILL 
believe that He is there, T(648) -475 to PURIFY what He has taken un¬ 
der His guidance? 

T 17 F 7. 
Have faith in EACH OTHER in what but SEEMS to be a try¬ 
ing time. 
THE GOAL IS SET. 
And your relationship has SANITY as 
its purpose. 
Now you find yourselves in an INSANE relationship. 



601 


1-591 


Volume I Text 


RECOGNIZED as such IN THE LIGHT OF ITS GOAL. 
Now the ego 
counsels thus; substitute for this ANOTHER relationship, to which 
your FORMER goal was QUITE appropriate. 
You can ESCAPE from 
your distress, ONLY BY GETTING RID OF EACH OTHER. 
You 
need not part entirely, if you choose not to do so. 
But you MUST 
exclude MAJOR AREAS of fantasy FROM each other, TO SAVE 
YOUR SANITY. 


T 17 F 8. 
Hear not this now! Have faith in Him Who ANSWERED 
you. 
He heard; has He not been very explicit in His answer? You are 
NOT now wholly insane. 
Can you DENY that He HAS given a 
MOST explicit statement? Now He asks for faith a little longer, even 
in bewilderment. 
For this will go, and you will see the JUSTIFICA¬ 
TION for your faith emerge, to bring you shining conviction . 
610 
Abandon Him not now, NOR EACH OTHER. 
This relationship 
HAS BEEN reborn as holy. 
Accept with gladness what you do not 
understand, and LET it be explained to you, as you perceive its pur¬ 
pose work in it, to MAKE it holy. 


T 17 F 9. 
You will find many opportunities to blame EACH OTHER 
for the 'failure' of your relationship. 
For it will seem, at times, to 
have NO purpose. 
A sense of aimlessness will come to haunt you, 
and to remind you of all the ways you once SOUGHT for satisfac¬ 
tion, and THOUGHT you found it. 
Forget not now the misery you 
REALLY found. 
And do not now breathe life 611 into your failing 
egos. 
For your relationship has NOT been disrupted. 
IT HAS BEEN 
SAVED. 
You are very new in the ways of salvation, and think you 

have LOST your way. 
YOUR way IS lost, but think not this is LOSS. 

T(649) -476 

T 17 F 10. 
In your newness, remember that you have started again, 
TOGETHER. 
And take each other's hand, to walk together along a 


< ’ 111 Romans 3:28 Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith apart from the deeds of the law. 

Romans 5:1 Therefore, having been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ, 

611 The Notes and the HLC both have “life” here which is grammatically correct. 
This appears to be a 
typing mistake but curiously, what was originally typed was “breath live” and while an “e” was 
handwritten in after “breath” to correct it to the Notes , the next word, “live,” was not corrected to “life.” 
So, while the Urtext has “live” it would seem that “life” is the correct reading. 



1-592 


602 



Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


road far more familiar than you now believe. 
Is it not certain, that 
you will remember a goal unchanged throughout eternity? For you 
have chosen but the goal of God, from which your true intent was 
NEVER absent. 
Throughout the Sonship is the song of freedom 
heard, in joyous echo of your choice. 
You have joined with many, in 
the holy instant, and THEY have joined with you. 
Think not your 
choice will leave YOU comfortless. 
For God Himself has blessed 
your special relationship . 
612 JOIN in His blessing, and withhold not 
yours upon it. 
For all it needs now IS your blessing, that you may 
see that in it rests salvation. 


T 17 F11. 
Condemn salvation not, for it HAS come to you. 
And wel¬ 
come it TOGETHER, for it has come to JOIN you together, in a rela¬ 
tionship in which ALL the Sonship is together blessed. 
You under¬ 
took, TOGETHER to invite the Holy Spirit into your relationship. 


He could not have entered otherwise. 
And, though you have made 
many mistakes since then, you have also made enormous efforts to 
help Him do His work. 
And He has NOT been lacking in apprecia¬ 
tion for all you have done for Him, nor does He see the mistakes at 
all. 


T 17 F12. 
Have you been similarly grateful to each other? Have you 
consistently appreciated the GOOD efforts, and OVERLOOKED 
mistakes? Or has your appreciation flickered and grown dim, in 
what SEEMED to be the LIGHT of the mistakes? You are now enter¬ 
ing upon a campaign to blame EACH OTHER for the discomfort of 
the situation in which you find yourselves. 
And by this LACK of 
thanks and gratitude, you make YOURSELVES unable to EXPRESS 
the holy instant, and thus you lose sight of it. 
The experience of an 
instant, HOWEVER compelling T(650) -477 it may be, is easily forgot¬ 
ten, if you allow time to close over it. 
It must be kept shining and 
gracious, in your AWARENESS of time, but not CONCEALED 
within it. 
The instant remains. 
But where are YOU? 


61 John 14:18 “I will not leave you comfortless; I will come to you.” 


603 


1-593 





Volume I Text 


T 17 F13. 
To give thanks to each other is to APPRECIATE the holy 
instant, and thus enable its RESULTS to be accepted AND SHARED. 

To ATTACK each other is not to LOSE the instant, but TO MAKE IT 
POWERLESS IN ITS EFFECTS. 
You HAVE received the holy in¬ 
stant, but you have established a condition IN WHICH YOU CAN¬ 
NOT USE IT. 
As a result, you do not realize that it is WITH YOU 
STILL. 
And, by CUTTING YOURSELF OFF from its EXPRESSION, 
you have denied yourself its benefit. 
You REINFORCE this, every 
time YOU ATTACK EACH OTHER, for the attack MUST blind you 
to YOURSELF. 
And it IS impossible to DENY yourself, and recog¬ 
nize what has been given, and RECEIVED by you. 


T 17 F14. 
You stand together in the holy Presence of Truth Itself. 
Here 
is the goal, together WITH you. 
Think you not the goal ITSELF will 
gladly arrange the MEANS for its accomplishment? It is just this 
same DISCREPANCY between the purpose which has BEEN ac¬ 
cepted and the means as they stand now, that SEEMS to make you 
suffer, but which makes Heaven glad. 
If Heaven were OUTSIDE 
you, you could NOT share in its gladness. 
But, because it is 
WITHIN, the gladness, too, IS yours. 
You ARE joined in purpose, 
but remain still separate and divided on the means. 
Yet the GOAL is 
fixed, firm and unalterable. 
And the means will surely fall in place, 
BECAUSE the goal is sure. 


T 17 F15. 
And YOU will share the gladness of the Sonship that it is 
so. 
As you begin to recognize, and ACCEPT the gifts you have so 
freely given to EACH OTHER, you will also accept the EFFECTS of 
the holy instant, and use them to correct ALL your mistakes, and 
free you from THEIR results. 
And, learning this, you will have 
ALSO learned how to release ALL the Sonship, and offer it in glad¬ 
ness and thanksgiving to Him Who gave you YOUR release, and 
Who would EXTEND it through you. 
T(651) -478 613 


613 Jan. 
20, 1967 


1-594 


604 



Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


T 17 G. 
Practical Forgiveness (Notes 1437 9:274) 

T 17 G l. 
The practical application of the Holy Spirit's purpose is ex¬ 
tremely simple, but it IS unequivocal. 
In fact, in ORDER to be sim¬ 
ple, it MUST be unequivocal. 
The simple is merely what is EASILY 
UNDERSTOOD, and for this, it is apparent that IT MUST BE 
CLEAR. 
The setting of the Holy Spirit's goal is GENERAL. 
Now He 
will work WITH you, TO MAKE IT SPECIFIC, for application IS 
specific. 
There are certain VERY specific guidelines He provides for 
ANY situation, but remember that you do not yet realize their uni¬ 
versal application. 
Therefore, it is essential, at this point, to use them 
in each situation separately, until you can more safely look BE¬ 
YOND each situation, in an understanding far broader than you 
now possess. 


T 17 G 2. 
In any situation in which YOU are uncertain, the FIRST 
thing to consider, very simply, is, "What do I want to come of this? 
What is it FOR?" The clarification of the goal belongs at the BE¬ 
GINNING, for it is this that will DETERMINE the outcome. 
In the 
ego's procedure, this is reversed. 
The SITUATION becomes the de¬ 
terminer of the outcome, WHICH CAN BE ANYTHING. 
The reason 
for this disorganized approach is evident. 
The ego does not know 
what it WANTS to come of it. 
It IS aware of what it does NOT want, 
but only that. 
It has no POSITIVE goal at all. 


T 17 G 3. 
Without a clear-cut, positive goal, set at the outset, the situa¬ 
tion just seems to happen, and makes no sense until it has AL¬ 
READY HAPPENED. 
Then you look BACK at it, and try to piece 
together what it MUST have meant. 
AND YOU WILL BE WRONG. 

Not only is your judgment IN THE PAST, but you have no idea 
what SHOULD have happened. 
No goal was set, with which to 
bring the means IN LINE. 
And now, the only judgment LEFT to 
make is whether or not the ego LIKES it; is it acceptable, or does it 
call for vengeance. 
The absence of a criterion for outcome, SET IN 
ADVANCE, makes understanding doubtful T(652) -479 and evalua¬ 
tion impossible. 



605 


1-595 


Volume I Text 


T 17 G 4. 
The value of deciding, in advance, what you WANT to hap¬ 
pen, is simply that you will perceive the situation as a means to 
MAKE it happen. 
You will therefore make every effort to OVER¬ 
LOOK what interferes with the accomplishment of your objective, 
and concentrate on everything that helps you meet it. 
It is quite no¬ 
ticeable that THIS approach has brought you closer to the Holy 
Spirit's SORTING OUT of truth and falsity. 
The "true" becomes 
what can be used to MEET the goal. 
The "false" becomes the useless 
FROM THIS POINT OF VIEW. 
The situation now HAS meaning, 
but only because the goal has MADE it meaningful. 


T 17 G 5. 
The goal of truth has further practical advantages. 
If the 
situation is used for truth and sanity, its outcome MUST be peace. 

And this is quite APART from what the outcome IS. 
For if peace is 
the CONDITION of truth and sanity, and CANNOT be WITHOUT 
them, where peace is, they MUST be. 
Truth comes of itself. 
If you 
experience PEACE, it is because the truth HAS come to you. 
And 
you WILL see the outcome truly, for deception can not prevail 
against you . 
614 And you will RECOGNIZE the outcome, BECAUSE 
you are at peace. 
Here, again, you see the OPPOSITE of the ego's 
way of looking. 
For the EGO believes the situation BRINGS the ex¬ 
perience. 
The Holy Spirit knows the situation IS as the goal deter¬ 
mines it, and is experienced ACCORDING to the goal. 


T 17 G 6. 
The goal of truth REQUIRES FAITH. 
Faith is implicit in the 
acceptance of the Holy Spirit's purpose. 
AND THIS FAITH IS ALL- 
INCLUSIVE. 
Where the goal of truth is set, there faith MUST be. 
The 
Holy Spirit sees the situation AS A WHOLE. 
The goal establishes 
the fact that EVERYONE involved in it WILL play his part in its ac¬ 
complishment. 
THIS IS INEVITABLE. 
No-one will fail in anything. 

T(653) -480 This SEEMS to ask for faith BEYOND you, and beyond 
what you can GIVE. 
But this is so ONLY from the viewpoint of the 
ego, for the ego believes in 'solving' conflicts through FRAGMEN¬ 
TATION, and does NOT perceive the situation as a whole. 
There- 


614 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 


1-596 


606 



Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


fore, it seeks to split off SEGMENTS of the situation and deal with 
them SEPARATELY. 
For it has faith in separation, and NOT in 
wholeness. 


T 17 G 7. 
Confronted with any ASPECT of the situation which SEEMS 
to be difficult, the ego will attempt to TAKE THIS ASPECT ELSE¬ 
WHERE, and resolve it there. 
And it will SEEM to be successful. 
Ex¬ 
cept that this attempt CONFLICTS WITH UNITY, and MUST ob¬ 
scure the goal of truth. 
And peace will not be experienced, EXCEPT 
in fantasy. 
Truth has NOT come, because faith has been DENIED, 
being WITHHELD from where it rightfully belonged. 
Thus do you 
LOSE the understanding of the situation the goal of truth would 
bring. 
For fantasy solutions bring but the ILLUSION of experience, 
and the illusion of peace is NOT the condition in which the truth can 
enter. 


T 17 G 8. 
The substitutes for ASPECTS of the situation are the wit¬ 
nesses to your LACK of faith. 
They demonstrate that you did NOT 
believe that the solution AND THE PROBLEM were in the same 
place. 
The problem WAS this lack of faith. 
And it is THIS you dem¬ 
onstrate, when you REMOVE it from its source, and place it else¬ 
where. 
As a result, YOU DO NOT SEE THE PROBLEM. 
Had you 
not lacked the faith it COULD be solved, the PROBLEM would be 
gone. 
And the situation would have been MEANINGFUL to you, 
because the INTERFERENCE in the way of understanding, would 
have been removed. 
To remove the problem ELSEWHERE is to 
KEEP it. 
For you remove yourself FROM it, and MAKE it unsolv- 
able. 


T 17 H. 
The Need for Faith (Notes 1445 10:5) 

T 17 H1. 
There is NO problem in ANY situation that faith will not 
solve. 
There is no SHIFT in any ASPECT of the problem, but will 
make SOLUTION IMPOSSIBLE. 
T(654) -481 For if you shift PART of a 
problem elsewhere, the meaning of the problem MUST be lost, and 
the SOLUTION to the problem is INHERENT in its meaning. 
Is it 
not possible that ALL your problems HAVE BEEN solved, but you 
have removed YOURSELF from the solution? Yet faith MUST be 


607 


1-597 


Volume I Text 


where something has BEEN done, and where you SEE it done. 
A 
situation is a relationship, being the joining of thoughts. 
If problems 
are perceived, it is because the thoughts are judged to be IN CON¬ 
FLICT. 
But if the goal is TRUTH, this is impossible. 
Some idea of 
bodies MUST have entered, for minds can NOT attack. 


T 17 H 2. 
The thought of bodies IS the sign of faithlessness, for bodies 
CANNOT solve anything. 
And it is their INTRUSION on the rela¬ 
tionship, an error in YOUR thoughts ABOUT the situation, that then 
became the JUSTIFICATION for your lack of faith. 
You WILL make 
this error, but be not at all concerned with that. 
The error does not 
matter. 
But do not USE the error to what SEEMS to be to your ad¬ 
vantage, for that DOES matter. 
Faithlessness brought to faith, will 
never interfere with truth. 
But faithlessness used AGAINST truth 
will ALWAYS destroy faith. 
If you lack faith, ask that it be restored 
WHERE IT WAS LOST, and seek not to have it MADE UP TO YOU 
elsewhere, as if you had been unjustly DEPRIVED of it. 


T 17 H 3. 
Only what YOU have not given CAN be lacking in ANY 
situation. 
But remember this; the goal of holiness was set for YOUR 
relationship, AND NOT BY YOU. 
YOU did not set it, because holi¬ 
ness can NOT BE SEEN except through faith, and your relationship 
was not holy BECAUSE your faith in one another was so limited 
and little. 
Your faith must grow, to meet the goal that has been set. 

The goal's REALITY will call this forth. 
For you will see that peace 
and faith will not come separately. 
What situation can you be in 
WITHOUT FAITH, and remain faithful to each other? EVERY situa¬ 
tion in which T(655) -482 you find yourselves, is but a means to meet 
the purpose set for YOUR relationship. 
See it as something ELSE, 
and you ARE faithless. 


T 17 H 4. 
USE NOT YOUR FAITHLESSNESS. 
Let it enter, and look 
upon it calmly, but DO NOT USE IT. 
Faithlessness is the servant of 
illusion, and wholly faithful to its master. 
USE it, and it will carry 
you straight to illusions. 
Be tempted not by what it offers you. 
It in¬ 
terferes, not with the goal, but with the VALUE of the goal TO YOU. 

Accept not the illusion of peace it offers, but look upon its offering. 



1-598 


608 


Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


and recognize it IS illusion. 
The GOAL of illusion is as closely tied to 
faithlessness, as faith to truth. 
If you lack faith in ANYONE to fulfill, 
AND PERFECTLY, his part in ANY situation dedicated IN AD¬ 
VANCE to truth, YOUR dedication is divided. 
And so you have 
been faithless TO EACH OTHER, and USED your faithlessness 
AGAINST each other. 


T 17 H 5. 
No relationship is holy, unless its holiness goes with it EVE¬ 
RYWHERE. 
As holiness and faith go hand in hand, so must its faith 
go everywhere WITH it. 
The goal's reality will call forth, AND AC¬ 
COMPLISH, every miracle needed for its fulfillment. 
Nothing too 
small or too enormous, nothing too insignificant or too imposing, 
too weak or too compelling, but will be gently turned to its use and 
purpose. 
The universe will serve it gladly, as it serves the universe. 

BUT DO NOT INTERFERE. 
The power set in you, in whom the 
Holy Spirit's goal has been established, is so far beyond your little 
conception of the infinite, that you have no idea how great the 
strength that goes with you. 


T 17 H 6. 
And you can use THIS in perfect safety. 
Yet, for all its might, 
so great it reaches past the stars and to the universe that lies beyond 
them, your little faithlessness can make IT useless, if you would use 
the faithlessness instead. 
But think on this, and learn the CAUSE of 
faithlessness; you think you hold against another 615 what he has 
done to you. 
But what you REALLY blame T(656) -483 him for is 
WHAT YOU DID TO HIM. 
It is not HIS past but YOURS, you hold 
against him. 
And you lack faith in HIM, because of what YOU were. 

Yet YOU are as innocent of what you were, as HE is. 
What never 
was is causeless, and IS NOT THERE to interfere with truth. 
There 
IS no cause for faithlessness, but there IS a Cause for faith. 


T 17 H 7. 
That Cause has entered ANY situation that shares its pur¬ 
pose. 
The light of truth shines from the center of the situation, and 
touches everyone to whom the situation's purpose calls. 
IT CALLS 


615 The Urtext manuscript has the “an” crossed out and “the” handwritten in. 
The Notes however has it 
as originally typed: “another.” We’re guessing that change was made at some later date and thus 
leaving what was originally typed. 
The HLC has “the other” and FIP has “your brother.” 


609 


1-599 



Volume I Text 


TO EVERYONE. 
There is NO situation that does NOT involve your 
WHOLE RELATIONSHIP, in every aspect and complete in every 
part. 
You can leave NOTHING of yourself outside it, and keep the 
situation holy. 
For it shares the purpose of your whole relationship, 
and derives its meaning FROM it. 
Enter each situation with the faith 
that you would give each other, or you ARE faithless to your own 
relationship. 
YOUR faith will call the others to SHARE your pur¬ 
pose, as this same purpose called forth the faith in you. 


T 17 H 8. 
And you will see the means you once employed to lead you 
to illusions, transformed to means for truth. 
Truth calls for faith, and 
faith makes room FOR TRUTH. 
When the Holy Spirit CHANGED 
the purpose of your relationship by exchanging yours for His, the 
goal He placed there WAS extended to every situation in which you 
entered, or will EVER enter. 
And EVERY situation was thus MADE 
FREE of the past, which WOULD have made it purposeLESS. 
You 
CALL FOR faith, because of Him Who walks with you in every 
situation. 
You are no longer wholly insane, NOR NO LONGER 
ALONE. 
For loneliness in God MUST be a dream. 
You whose rela¬ 
tionship SHARES the Holy Spirit's goal, are SET APART from lone¬ 
liness, because the truth has come. 
Its call for faith is strong. 
Use not 
your faithlessness against it, for it calls you to salvation and to 
peace. 
T(657) -484 

T 17 I. 
The Conditions of Forgiveness (Notes 1450 10:10) 

T 17 11 . 
The holy instant is nothing more than a special case, or an 
extreme example, of what EVERY situation is MEANT to be. 
The 
meaning that the Holy Spirit's purpose has GIVEN it, is also given 
to EVERY situation. 
It calls forth just the same SUSPENSION of 
faithlessness, withheld and left UNUSED, that faith might answer to 
the call of truth. 
The holy instant is the shining example, the clear 
and unequivocal demonstration of the meaning of EVERY relation¬ 
ship, and EVERY situation SEEN AS A WHOLE. 
Faith has AC¬ 
CEPTED every ASPECT of the situation, and faithlessness has not 
forced ANY exclusion on it. 
It is a situation of perfect peace, simply 
because YOU have LET IT BE WHAT IT IS. 



1-600 


610 


Chapter 17 - Forgiveness and Healing 


T 17 12 . 
This simple courtesy is all the Holy Spirit asks of you. 
Let 
Truth be what it is. 
Do not INTRUDE upon it, do not ATTACK it, do 
NOT interrupt its coming. 
Let it encompass EVERY situation, and 
bring you peace. 
Not even faith is asked of you, for Truth asks noth¬ 
ing. 
Let it enter, and IT will call forth, and SECURE for you, the faith 
you need for peace. 
But rise you not AGAINST it, for against YOUR 
opposition it CANNOT come. 
Would you not WANT to make a 
holy instant of EVERY situation? For such is the gift of faith, freely 
given wherever faithlessness is laid aside, UNUSED. 


T 17 13. 
And THEN the power of the Holy Spirit's purpose is free for 
use instead. 
This power INSTANTLY transforms ALL situations 
into one sure and continuous means for ESTABLISHING His pur¬ 
pose, and DEMONSTRATING its reality. 
What has been DEMON¬ 
STRATED has called for faith, and has been GIVEN it. 
Now it be¬ 
comes a fact, from which faith can no longer BE withheld. 
The strain 
of REFUSING faith to truth is enormous, and far greater than you 

realize. 
But to ANSWER truth with faith entails no strain at all. 
T(658) 
-485 

T 17 14. 
To you who have ACKNOWLEDGED the call of your Re¬ 
deemer, the strain of NOT responding to His call SEEMS to be 
GREATER than before. 
This is not so. 
Before, the strain was there, 
but you attributed it TO SOMETHING ELSE, believing that the 
'something else' PRODUCED it. 
This was NEVER true. 
But what the 
'something else' produced was sorrow and depression, sickness and 
pain, darkness and dim imaginings of terror, cold fantasies of fear, 
and fiery dreams of hell. 
And it was nothing but the intolerable 
strain of your refusal to give faith to truth, and see its evident real¬ 
ity. 


T 17 15. 
Such was the crucifixion of the Son of God. 
His faithlessness 
did this to him. 
Think carefully before you let yourself use faithless¬ 
ness against him. 
For he IS risen, and YOU have accepted the cause 
of his awakening AS YOURS. 
You have assumed your part in his 
redemption, and you are now fully responsible to him. 
Fail him not 
now, for it has been given you to realize what your lack of faith in 


611 


1-601 


Volume I Text 


him MUST mean to YOU. 
His salvation is your ONLY purpose. 
See 
only this in EVERY situation, and it WILL be a means for bringing 
ONLY this. 


T 17 16 . 
When you accepted truth as the goal for your relationship, 
you became givers of peace, as surely as your Father gave peace to 
YOU. 
For the goal of peace cannot BE accepted, APART from its 
conditions. 
And you had faith in it, for no-one accepts what he does 
NOT believe is REAL. 
YOUR PURPOSE HAS NOT CHANGED, and 
WILL not change, for you ACCEPTED what can NEVER change. 

And nothing that it needs to BE forever changeless, can you now 
WITHHOLD from it. 
Your release is certain. 
Give as you have re¬ 
ceived. 
And demonstrate that you have risen FAR beyond ANY 
situation that could hold you back, and keep you SEPARATE from 
Him Whose call you answered. 
T(659) -486 


1-602 


PROOF 


612 


COPY 


Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


Chapter 18- The Dream and the Reality 

T 18 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1454 10:14) 

T 18 A l. 
To 616 substitute is to ACCEPT INSTEAD. 
If you would but 
consider exactly what this entails, you would perceive at once how 
much at variance this is with the goal the Holy Spirit has given you 
and would accomplish FOR you. 
To substitute is to CHOOSE BE¬ 
TWEEN, renouncing one IN FAVOR of the other. 
For this SPECIAL 
purpose, one is judged more valuable, and the other is REPLACED 
by him. 
The relationship in which the substitution occurred is thus 
fragmented, and ITS PURPOSE SPLIT accordingly. 
To fragment IS 
TO EXCLUDE, and substitution is the strongest defense the ego has 
for separation. 


T 18 A 2. 
The Holy Spirit NEVER substitutes. 
Where the ego perceives 
one person as a REPLACEMENT FOR another, the Holy Spirit sees 
them joined and indivisible. 
He does not judge BETWEEN them, 
KNOWING they are one. 
Being united, they are one BECAUSE 
THEY ARE THE SAME. 
Substitution is clearly a process in which 
they are PERCEIVED AS DIFFERENT. 
One would UNITE; the other 
SEPARATE. 
NOTHING can come BETWEEN what God has joined, 
and what the Holy Spirit sees as one . 
617 But everything SEEMS to 
come between the fragmented relationships the ego sponsors, to de¬ 
stroy. 


T 18 A 3. 
The one emotion in which substitution is impossible, is love. 

But fear involves substitution by definition, for it is love's RE¬ 
PLACEMENT. 
Fear is both a fragmented AND FRAGMENTING 
emotion. 
It SEEMS, to take many forms, and each seems to require a 
DIFFERENT form of acting out, for satisfaction. 
While this appears 
to introduce quite variable BEHAVIOR, a far more serious effect lies 
in the fragmented PERCEPTION from which the behavior stems. 



6 6 January 25, 1967 

617 Matthew 19:6 “So then, they are no longer two but one flesh. 
Therefore what God has joined 
together, let not man separate.” 


613 


1-603 



Volume I Text 


NO-ONE IS SEEN COMPLETE. 
The body is emphasized, with spe¬ 
cial emphasis on certain parts, and USED AS THE STANDARD FOR 
COMPARISON for either acceptance or rejection of suitability for 
acting out a special FORM of fear. 
T(660) -487 

T 18 B. 
Substitution as a Defense (Notes 1456 10:16) 

T 18 B l. 
You 618 who believe that God is fear made but ONE substitu¬ 
tion. 
It has taken many forms, because it was the substitution of 
fragmentation for wholeness. 
It has become splintered and subdi¬ 
vided and divided again, over and over, that it is now almost im¬ 
possible to perceive it once was one, and still IS what it was. 
That 
ONE error, which brought truth to illusion, infinity to time, and life 
to death, was all you ever made. 
Your whole world rests upon it. 

Everything you see reflects it. 
And every special relationship you 
ever made is PART of it. 


T 18 B 2. 
You have expressed surprise at hearing how VERY different 
is reality from what YOU see. 
You do not realize the magnitude of 
that ONE error. 
It was so vast and so COMPLETELY incredible, that 
from it, a world of total unreality HAD to emerge. 
What else 
COULD come of it? Its fragmented ASPECTS are fearful enough, as 
you begin to LOOK at them. 
But nothing you have ever seen BE¬ 
GINS to show you the enormity of the ORIGINAL error, which 
seemed to cast you out of Heaven, to shatter knowledge into mean¬ 
ingless bits of disunited perceptions, and TO FORCE YOU TO FUR¬ 
THER SUBSTITUTIONS. 


T 18 B 3. 
That was the first projection of error outward. 
The world 
arose to hide it, and became the screen on which it was projected, 
and drawn between you and truth. 
For truth extends INWARD, 
where the idea of loss is meaningless, and only INCREASE is con¬ 
ceivable. 
Do you REALLY think it strange that a world in which 
EVERYTHING is backward and upside down, arose from this? IT 
WAS INEVITABLE. 
For truth brought to THIS could only remain 


618 January 27, 1967 


1-604 


614 



Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


within in quiet, and take no part in all the mad projection by which 
this world was made. 


T 18 B 4. 
Call it not sin, but madness, for such it was, and so it still 
remains. 
Invest it not with guilt, for guilt implies it was accom¬ 
plished IN REALITY. 
And, above all, BE NOT AFRAID OF IT. 


When you seem to see some twisted form of the original error rise to 
frighten you, say only, 'God is NOT fear, but love/ and it will dis¬ 
appear. 
619 THE TRUTH WILL SAVE YOU. 
It has NOT left you, T(66l) 
-488 to go out into the mad world and so DEPART FROM YOU. 
In¬ 
ward is sanity; INsanity is OUTSIDE you. 
You but BELIEVE it is the 
other way; that truth is OUTSIDE, and error and guilt within. 


T 18 B 5. 
Your little, senseless substitutions, touched with insanity, 
and swirling lightly off on a mad course like a feather dancing in¬ 
sanely in the wind, HAVE no substance. 
They fuse and merge and 
separate in shifting and totally meaningless patterns, which need 
not be judged at all. 
To judge them INDIVIDUALLY is pointless. 

Their tiny differences in form are not REAL differences at all. 
NONE 
OF THEM MATTERS. 
THAT they have in common, and nothing 
else, but what else is NECESSARY to make them all the same? Let 
them go, dancing in the wind, dipping and turning 'til they disap¬ 
pear from sight, far, far OUTSIDE you. 
And turn you to the stately 
calm within, where, in holy stillness, dwells the living God you 
never left, and Who never left you. 
620 

T 18 B 6. 
The Holy Spirit takes you gently by the hand, and retraces 
WITH you your mad journey OUTSIDE yourself, leading you gently 
back to the truth and safety within. 
He brings all your insane projec¬ 
tions and your wild substitutions which YOU have placed OUT¬ 
SIDE you, to the truth. 
Thus, He REVERSES the course of insanity, 
and restores you to reason. 
In your relationship where He has taken 
charge of everything at your request. 
He has set the course inward. 



619 1 John 4:18 There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear involves torment. 

But he who fears has not been made perfect in love. 


620 John 6:69 Also we have come to believe and know that You are the Christ, the Son of the living 
God. 



615 


1-605 



Volume I Text 


to the truth you SHARE. 
In the mad world OUTSIDE you, nothing 
CAN be shared, but only SUBSTITUTED, and sharing and substitut¬ 
ing have NOTHING in common in reality. 


T 18 B 7. 
Within yourselves, you love each other with perfect love. 

Here is holy ground, 621 in which no substitutes can enter, and where 
only the TRUTH about each other can abide. 
Here you are joined in 
God, as much together as you are with Him. 
The original error has 
not entered here, nor ever 622 will. 
Here is the radiant truth, to which 
the Holy Spirit submitted your relationship. 
T(662) -489 Let Him bring 
it here, where YOU would have it be. 
Give Him but a little faith in 
each other, to help Him show you that no substitute you made for 
Heaven can keep you from it. 


T 18 B 8. 
In you there is no separation, and no substitute can keep you 
from each other. 
Your reality was GOD's creation, and HAS no sub¬ 
stitute. 
You are so firmly joined in truth, that only God is there. 
And 
He could NEVER accept something else INSTEAD of you. 
He loves 
you both, equally and as one. 
And as He loves you, so you ARE. 


You are NOT joined together by illusions, but in the Thought so 
holy and so perfect that illusions cannot remain to darken the holy 
place in which you stand together. 
God is with you, my brothers. 


Let us join in Him in peace and gratitude, and accept His gift of our 
most holy and perfect reality, that we share in Him. 


T 18 B 9. 
Heaven is restored to all the Sonship through your relation¬ 
ship. 
For in it lies the Sonship, whole and beautiful, safe in your 
love. 
Heaven has answered quietly, for all illusions have been gently 
brought unto the truth in you, and Love has shined upon you, bless¬ 
ing your relationship with truth. 
God and His whole Creation has 623 


621 Exodus 3:4 And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the 
midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. 
And he said, Here am I. 


Exodus 3:5 And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place 
whereon thou standest is holy ground. 


622 Urtext manuscript has “never” and the Notes might have the same, it is uncertain due to poor 
legibility. 
Later editing changes this to “ever” from “never” which seems likely to be what was 
originally intended and at least is grammatically correct. 


623 The Urtext manuscript reads “has.” The Notes is the same. 
HLC and FIP use “have” and grammar 
requires we use the plural “have” for the plural subject which is “God AND His whole Creation” unless 


1-606 


616 



Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


entered it together. 
How lovely and how holy is your relationship, 
with the truth shining upon it! Heaven beholds it, and rejoices that 
you have let it come to you. 
And God Himself is glad that your rela¬ 
tionship is as it was created. 
The universe within you stands with 
you together. 
And Heaven looks with love on what is joined in it, 
along with its Creator. 


T 18 B 10 . 
Whom God hath called should hear no substitutes. 
Their 
call is but an echo of the original error which shattered Heaven. 
For 
what became of peace, in those who heard? Return with me to 
Heaven, walking together out of this world, and through another to 
the loveliness and joy the other holds within it. 
Would you still fur¬ 
ther weaken and break apart what is already T(663) -490 broken and 
hopeless? Is it HERE that you would look for happiness? Or would 
you not prefer to HEAL what has been broken, and join in making 
whole what has been ravaged by separation and disease? 

T 18 B ll. 
You have been called, together, to the most holy function 
that this world contains. 
It is the ONLY one that has no limits, and 
that reaches out to every broken fragment of the Sonship, with heal¬ 
ing and uniting comfort. 
This is offered YOU, in your holy relation¬ 
ship. 
Accept it HERE, and you WILL give as you have accepted and 
received. 
The peace of God is given you, with the glowing purpose 
in which you join. 
The holy light that brought you together MUST 
extend, as YOU accept it. 
T(664) -491 

T 18 C. 
The Basis of the Dream (Notes 1463 10:23) 

T 18 C l. 
Does 624 not a world that seems quite real arise in dreams? 
But think what this world is. 
It is clearly NOT the world you saw 
BEFORE you slept. 
Rather, it is a DISTORTION of the world, 
planned solely around what you would have PREFERRED. 
Here, 
you are "free" to make over whatever SEEMED to attack you, and 
CHANGE it into a TRIBUTE to your ego, which was outraged by 


we understand “God and His whole Creation” to be a single thing , which interpretation is possible, in 
which case “has” is correct. 


624 January 30, 1967 


617 


1-607 



Volume I Text 


the attack. 
This would not be YOUR wish unless you saw yourself 
AS ONE with the ego, which ALWAYS looks upon itself, and there¬ 
fore on you, as UNDER attack, and highly VULNERABLE to it. 


T 18 c 2. 
Dreams are chaotic BECAUSE they are governed by your 
conflicting wishes. 
And therefore they have NO concern with what 
is true. 
They are the best example you could have of how perception 
can be utilized to substitute illusions for truth. 
You do not take them 
seriously on awaking, because the fact that, in them, reality is so 
OUTRAGEOUSLY violated, becomes apparent. 
Yet they ARE a way 
of LOOKING at the world, and CHANGING it TO SUIT THE EGO 
BETTER. 
They provide STRIKING examples, both of the ego's IN¬ 
ABILITY to tolerate reality, and your willingness to CHANGE real¬ 
ity on its behalf. 


T 18 c 3. 
You do not find the differences between what you see in 
sleep and on awaking disturbing. 
You recognize that what you see 
on waking is blotted out in dreams. 
Yet, on awakening, you do NOT 
expect it to be gone. 
In dreams, YOU arrange everything. 
People 
BECOME what you would have them be, and what they do YOU 
order. 
No limits on substitution are laid upon you; for a time, it 
seems as if the world were GIVEN you, to make it what you will. 

You do NOT realize that YOU are ATTACKING it, trying to tri¬ 
umph over it and MAKE it serve you. 


T 18 C 4. 
Dreams are perceptual temper tantrums, in which you liter¬ 
ally scream, 'I want it THUS!' And thus it seems to be. 
And yet, the 
dream can NOT escape its origin. 
Anger and fear pervade it, and in 
an instant the illusion of satisfaction is invaded by the illusion of 
terror. 
For the T(665) -492 dream of your ability to CONTROL reality 
by substituting a world that you prefer IS terrifying. 
Your attempts 
to BLOT OUT reality are VERY fearful, but THIS you are NOT will¬ 
ing to accept. 
And so you SUBSTITUTE the fantasy that REALITY is 
fearful, NOT what you would DO to it. 
And thus is guilt MADE 
REAL. 


T 18 c 5. 
Dreams show you that you HAVE the power to make a 
world as you would have it, and that, BECAUSE you WANT it, you 


1-608 


618 


Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


SEE it. 
And WHILE you see it, you do NOT doubt that it is real. 
Yet 
here is a world, clearly WITHIN your mind, that SEEMS to be out¬ 
side. 
You do NOT respond to it as though you made it, nor do you 
realize that the emotions which the dream produces MUST come 
from you. 
It is the FIGURES in the dream, and what THEY do that 
seem to MAKE THE DREAM. 
You do not realize that you are mak¬ 
ing them act out FOR you, for if you did, the guilt would not be 
theirs, and the illusion of satisfaction would be gone. 


T 18 c 6. 
In dreams these features are not obscure. 
You seem to 
waken, and the dream is gone. 
But what you fail to recognize is that 
what CAUSED the dream, has NOT gone with it. 
Your WISH to 
make another world that is NOT real, REMAINS with you. 
And 
what you seem to WAKE to, is but another FORM of this same 
world you see in dreams. 
All your time is spent in dreaming. 
Your 
sleeping and waking dreams have different forms, and that is all. 

THEIR CONTENT IS THE SAME. 
They are your protest AGAINST 
reality, and your fixed and insane wish to CHANGE it. 


T 18 c 7. 
In your WAKING dreams, the special relationship has a spe¬ 
cial place. 
It is the means by which you try to make your SLEEPING 
dreams COME TRUE. 
From this, you do not waken. 
The special re¬ 
lationship is your DETERMINATION to keep your hold on unreal¬ 
ity, and to PREVENT yourself from waking. 
And while you see 
more VALUE in sleeping than in waking, you will NOT let go of it. 

The Holy Spirit, ever practical in His wisdom, ACCEPTS your 
dreams, and uses them T(666) -493 as means for WAKING. 
YOU 
would have used them to remain ASLEEP. 


T 18 c 8. 
We once said that the first change, before dreams disappear, 
is that your dreams of fear are changed to HAPPY dreams. 
That is 
what the Holy Spirit does in your special relationship. 
He does NOT 
destroy it, nor snatch it away from you. 
But He does use it differ¬ 
ently, as a help to make HIS purpose REAL to you. 
Your special re¬ 
lationships will remain, NOT as a source of pain and guilt, but as a 
source of joy and freedom. 
It will NOT be for you alone, for therein 


619 


1-609 


Volume I Text 


lay its misery. 
As its UNholiness kept it as a thing apart, its HOLI¬ 
NESS will become an offering to everyone. 


T 18 c 9. 
Your special relationship will be a means for UNDOING 
guilt in everyone blessed through your holy relationship. 
It will be a 
happy dream, and one which you will SHARE with all who come 
within your sight. 
Through it, the blessing that the Holy Spirit has 
laid upon it, will be EXTENDED. 
Think not that He has forgotten 
anyone, in the purpose He has given you. 
And think not that He has 
forgotten YOU, to whom He GAVE this gift. 
He uses everyone who 
calls on Him, as means for the salvation of everyone. 
And He will 
waken everyone through you, who offered your relationship to 
Him. 


T 18 C 10. 
If you but recognized His gratitude! Or mine through His! 
For we are joined as one in purpose, being of one mind with Him. 

Let not the dream take hold to close your eyes. 
It is not strange that 
dreams can make a world that is unreal. 
The WISH to make it IS in¬ 
credible. 
Your relationship has become one in which the wish has 
been REMOVED, because its purpose has been changed from one of 
dreams to one of truth. 
You are not sure of this, because you think it 
may be THIS that is the dream. 
You are so used to choosing between 
dreams, you do not see that you have made, at last, the choice be¬ 
tween the truth and ALL ILLUSIONS. 
T(667) -494 

T 18 c ll. 
Yet Heaven IS sure. 
THIS IS NO DREAM. 
Its coming means 
that you have chosen truth, and it has come, because you have been 
willing to let your special relationship meet its conditions. 
In your 
relationship, the Holy Spirit has gently laid the real world; the 
world of happy dreams, from which awaking is so easy and so natu¬ 
ral. 
For, as your sleeping and your waking dreams represent the 
same wishes in YOUR mind, so do the real world and the truth of 
Heaven join in the Will of God. 
The dream of waking is easily trans¬ 
ferred to its reality. 
For this dream comes from your will, JOINED 


1-610 


620 


Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 

with the Will of God. 
And what THIS will would HAVE accom¬ 
plished, has never NOT been done. 
T(668) -495 625 

T 18 D. 
Light in the Dream (Notes 1470 10:29) 

T 18 D 1. 
You who have spent your lives in bringing truth to illusion, 
reality to fantasy, HAVE walked the way of dreams. 
For you have 
gone from waking to sleeping, and on and on to a yet deeper sleep. 

Each dream has led to other dreams, and every fantasy that 
SEEMED to bring a light into the darkness but made the darkness 
deeper. 
Your GOAL was darkness, in which no ray of light could 
enter. 
And you sought a blackness so complete that you could hide 
from truth forever, in complete insanity. 
What you forgot was sim¬ 
ply that God can NOT destroy Himself. 
The light is IN you. 
Dark¬ 
ness can COVER it, but CANNOT put it out. 
626 
T 18 D 2. 
As the light comes nearer, you WILL rush to darkness, 
shrinking from the truth, sometimes retreating to the lesser forms of 
fear, and sometimes to stark terror. 
But you WILL advance, because 
your goal IS the advance from fear to truth. 
YOU KNOW THIS. 
The 
goal which you accepted IS the goal of knowledge, for which you 
signified your willingness. 
Fear seems to live in darkness. 
WHEN 
you are afraid, YOU HAVE STEPPED BACK. 
Let us then join 
quickly in an instant of light, and it will be enough to remind you 
that your goal IS light. 
Truth has rushed to meet you, since YOU 
called upon it. 


T 18 D 3. 
If you knew Who walks beside you on THIS way, which 
YOU have chosen, fear would be impossible. 
627 You do NOT know, 
because the journey into darkness has been long and cruel, and you 
have gone deep into it. 
A little flicker of your eyelids, closed so long, 

625 Feb. 
2. 
1967 

626 Luke 1:79 “To give light to those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death, To guide our feet 
into the way of peace.” 

John 1:5 And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it. 


627 Luke 24:13-16 Now behold, two of them were traveling that same day to a village called Emmaus, 
which was seven miles from Jerusalem. 
And they talked together of all these things which had 
happened. 
So it was, while they conversed and reasoned, that Jesus Himself drew near and went with 
them. 
But their eyes were restrained, so that they did not know Him. 



621 


1-611 



Volume I Text 


has not yet been sufficient to give you confidence in yourselves, so 
long despised. 
You go TOWARD love, still hating it, and TERRIBLY 
afraid of its judgment upon you. 
And you do NOT realize that you 

are NOT afraid of love, but only OF WHAT YOU MADE OF IT. 

T(669) -496 

T 18 D 4. 
You are advancing to love's MEANING, and away from 
ALL illusions in which you have surrounded it. 
When you retreat to 
the illusions, YOUR FEAR INCREASES, for there is little doubt that 
what YOU think it means IS fearful. 
But what is that to us who 
travel surely and very swiftly AWAY from fear? You who hold each 
other's hand also hold mine, for when you joined each other you 
were not alone. 
Do you believe that I would LEAVE you in the 
darkness you agreed to leave with ME? In your relationship is this 
world's light. 
And fear MUST disappear before you now. 


T 18 D 5. 
Be tempted not to snatch away the gift of faith you offered to 
each other. 
You will succeed only in frightening yourselves. 
The gift 
is given forever, for God Himself received it. 
You CANNOT take it 
back. 
YOU HAVE ACCEPTED GOD. 
The holiness of your relation¬ 
ship is established in Heaven. 
You do not realize WHAT you ac¬ 
cepted, but remember that your understanding is NOT necessary. 

All that was necessary was merely the WISH to understand. 
That 
wish was the DESIRE TO BE HOLY. 
The will of God IS granted you. 

For you desire the only thing you ever had, or ever were. 


T 18 D 6. 
Each instant that we spend together will teach you that this 
goal is possible, and will strengthen your DESIRE to reach it. 
And in 
your desire, lies its accomplishment. 
YOUR desire is now in COM¬ 
PLETE accord with all the power of the Holy Spirit's Will. 
No little 
faltering footsteps that you may take can separate your desire from 
His Will, and from His STRENGTH. 
I hold your hand as surely as 
you agreed to take each other's. 
YOU WILL NOT SEPARATE for I 
stand with you, and walk with you in your advance to truth. 
And 
where we go we carry God with us. 
T(670) -497 

T 18 D 7. 
In your relationship, you have joined with me in bringing 
Heaven to the Son of God, who hid in darkness. 
You have been will- 


1-612 


622 


Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


ing to bring the darkness to light, and this willingness has given 
strength to everyone who would REMAIN in darkness. 
Those who 
would see WILL see. 
And they will join with me in carrying THEIR 
light into the darkness, when the darkness in them is OEFERED to 
the light, and is removed forever. 
My need for you, joined with me 
in the holy light of your relationship, is YOUR need for salvation. 

Would I not give you what you gave to me? Lor when you joined 
each other, you answered ME. 


T 18 D 8. 
You who are now the bringers of salvation have the function 
of bringing light to darkness. 
The darkness in you HAS been 
brought to light. 
Carry it back TO darkness, from the holy instant to 
which you BROUGHT it. 
We are made whole in our desire to make 
whole. 
Let not time worry you, for all the fear that you experience is 
really past. 
Time has been re-adjusted to help us do, together, what 
your separate pasts would hinder. 
You have gone PAST fear, for no 
two minds can JOIN in the desire for love without love's joining 
THEM. 


T 18 D 9. 
Not one light in Heaven but goes with you. 
Not one ray that 
shines forever in the Mind of God but shines on you. 
Heaven is 
JOINED with you in your advance to Heaven. 
When such great 
light has joined with you to give the little spark of your desire the 
power of God Himself, can YOU remain in darkness? You are com¬ 
ing home together, after a long and meaningless journey which you 
undertook apart, and which led nowhere. 
You have FOUND each 
other, and will light each other's way. 
And from this light will the 
Great Rays extend back into darkness and forward unto God, to 
shine away the past and so make room for His Eternal Presence, in 
which everything is radiant in the light. 
T(671) - 498 - 62S 

T 18 E. 
The Little Willingness (Notes 1476 10:36) 

T 18 E l. 
The holy instant is the RESULT of your determination to be 
holy. 
It is the ANSWER. 
The desire and the willingness to let it come 
PRECEDE its coming. 
YOU prepare your minds for it ONLY to the 


““February 5, 1967. 



623 


1-613 



Volume I Text 


extent of RECOGNIZING that you want it above all else. 
It is not 
necessary that you do more; indeed, it is necessary that you realize 
that you can NOT do more. 
Do not attempt to give the Holy Spirit 
what He does NOT ask, or you will add the ego unto Him, and 
CONFUSE THE TWO. 
He asks but little. 
It is HE Who adds the 
greatness and the might. 
He JOINS with you to make the holy in¬ 
stant far greater than you can understand. 


T 18 E 2. 
It is your realization that you NEED do so little that enables 
HIM to give so much. 
Trust not your good intentions. 
They are not 
enough. 
But trust IMPLICITLY your willingness, whatever else may 
enter. 
Concentrate only on this, and be NOT disturbed that shadows 
surround it. 
THAT IS WHY YOU CAME. 
If you could come WITH¬ 
OUT them, you would not NEED the holy instant. 
Come to it not in 
arrogance, assuming that YOU must achieve the state its coming 
brings with it. 
The miracle of the holy instant lies in your willing¬ 
ness to let IT be what it is. 
And in your willingness for THIS, lies 
also your acceptance of yourself as YOU were meant to be. 


T 18 E 3. 
Humility will NEVER ask that you remain content with lit¬ 
tleness. 
But it DOES require that you be NOT content with less than 
greatness which comes NOT of you. 
Your difficulty with the holy 
instant arises from your fixed conviction that you are not WORTHY 
of it. 
And what is this but the determination to BE as you would 
MAKE YOURSELF? God did not create His dwelling-place unwor¬ 
thy of Him. 
And if you believe He cannot enter where He wills to 
be, you MUST be INTERFERING with His Will. 
You do not need 
the strength of willingness to come from YOU, but only from HIS 
Will. 


T 18 E 4. 
The holy instant does NOT come from your little willingness 
alone. 
It is ALWAYS the result of your SMALL willingness COM¬ 
BINED with the unlimited power of HIS Will. 
You have been wrong 
in thinking that it is T(672) - 499 - needful to prepare YOURSELF for 
Him. 
It is impossible to make arrogant preparations for holiness, 
and NOT believe that it is up to you to establish the conditions for 
peace. 
GOD HAS ESTABLISHED THEM. 
They do not wait upon 


1-614 


624 


Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


your willingness for what they ARE. 
Your willingness is needed 
ONLY to make it possible to TEACH you what they are. 


T 18 E 5. 
If you maintain you are unworthy of LEARNING this, you 
are INTERFERING with the lesson by believing that YOU MUST 
MAKE THE LEARNER DIFFERENT. 
You did NOT make the 
learner, nor CAN you make him different. 
Would you FIRST make a 
miracle of YOURSELF, and THEN expect one to be made FOR you? 
You merely ask the QUESTION. 
The answer is GIVEN. 
Seek not to 
ANSWER it, but merely RECEIVE the answer AS it is given. 
In pre¬ 
paring for the holy instant, do NOT attempt to make yourself holy 
to be READY to receive it. 
That is but to confuse YOUR role with 
His. 
Atonement CANNOT come to those who think that THEY 
must FIRST atone, but only to those who offer it NOTHING MORE 
than simple willingness to make way for it. 


T 18 E 6. 
Purification is of God alone. 
And THEREFORE for you. 

Rather than seek to prepare YOURSELF for Him, try to think thus: 

"I who am host to God AM worthy of Him. 


He Who ESTABLISHED His dwelling-place in me created it as He 
would have it be. 


It is not needful that I make it ready for Him, but only that I DO 
NOT INTERFERE with His plan to RESTORE to me my own 
AWARENESS of my readiness, which is eternal. 


I need ADD nothing to His plan. 


But to RECEIVE it, I must be willing NOT to substitute my own IN 
PLACE of it." 

T 18 E 7. 
And that is all. 
Add MORE, and you will merely TAKE 
AWAY the little that is asked. 
Remember YOU MADE GUILT, and 
that your plan for the ESCAPE from guilt has been to bring Atone¬ 
ment TO it, and MAKE SALVATION FEARFUL. 
And it is ONLY 
fear that you will add, if you prepare YOURSELF for love. 
The 
preparation for the holy instant belongs to Him Who gives it. 
RE¬ 
LEASE T(673) - 500 -yourselves to Him Whose function IS release. 
Do 


625 


1-615 



Volume I Text 


NOT assume His function FOR Him. 
Give Him but what He asks, 
that you may learn how LITTLE is your part, and how great is HIS. 


T 18 E 8. 
It is this that makes the holy instant so easy and so natural. 

YOU make it difficult, because you insist there MUST be more that 
you need do. 
You find it difficult to ACCEPT the idea that you need 
give so LITTLE, to receive so much. 
And it is very hard for you to 
realize that it is not personally insulting that YOUR contribution 
and the Holy Spirit's are so EXTREMELY disproportionate. 
You are 
still convinced YOUR understanding is a powerful contribution to 
the truth, and MAKES IT WHAT IT IS. 
Yet we have emphasized 
that you need understand nothing. 
Salvation is easy JUST BECAUSE 
it asks nothing that you cannot give RIGHT NOW. 


T 18 E 9. 
Forget not that it has been your decision to make EVERY¬ 
THING that is natural and easy for you IMPOSSIBLE. 
What you be¬ 
lieve to be impossible WILL BE, if God so wills it, but you will re¬ 
main quite UNAWARE of it. 
If you believe the holy instant is diffi¬ 
cult FOR YOU, it is because YOU have become the arbiter of what is 
possible, and remain UNWILLING to give place to One Who 
KNOWS. 
The whole belief in orders of difficulty in miracles is cen¬ 
tered on this. 
Everything God wills is not only possible, but has al¬ 
ready happened. 
And that is WHY the past has gone. 
It NEVER 
HAPPENED in reality. 
Only in your own minds, WHICH 
THOUGHT IT DID, is its undoing needful. 


T 18 F. 
The Happy Dream (Notes 148110:41) 

T 18 F l. 
Prepare you NOW for the undoing of what never was. 
If you 
already UNDERSTOOD the difference between truth and illusion. 

Atonement would HAVE no meaning. 
The holy instant, your holy 
relationship, the Holy Spirit's teaching, and all the means by which 
salvation is accomplished, would have no purpose. 
For they are all 
but ASPECTS of the plan to change your dreams of fear to happy 
dreams, from which you waken easily to knowledge. 
Put yourself 
NOT in charge of this, for you can NOT distinguish between ad¬ 
vance and retreat. 
Some of your greatest advances YOU have 


1-616 


626 


Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


judged as failures, and some of your deepest retreats YOU have 
evaluated as success. 
T(674) - 521 - 

T 18 F 2. 
Never approach the holy instant AFTER you have tried to 
remove all fear and hatred from your mind. 
That is ITS function. 

Never attempt to OVERLOOK your guilt BEFORE you ask the Holy 
Spirit's help. 
That is HIS function. 
Your part is only to offer Tlim a 
LITTLE willingness to LET Tlim remove all fear and hatred, and to 
BE forgiven. 
On your little faith, joined with HIS understanding, HE 
will build your part in the Atonement, and MAKE SURE that you 
fulfill it easily. 
And WITH Him, YOU will build a ladder planted in 
the solid rock of faith, and rising even to Heaven. 
Nor will you use it 
to ascend to Heaven alone. 


T 18 F 3. 
Through your holy relationship, reborn and blessed in every 
holy instant which you did NOT arrange, thousands will rise to 
Heaven WITH you. 
Can YOU plan for THIS? Or could you PRE¬ 
PARE yourselves for such a function? Yet it IS possible, because God 
wills it. 
Nor will He change His Mind about it. 
The means and pur¬ 
pose BOTH belong to Him. 
You have accepted one; the other will be 
provided. 
A purpose such as this, WITHOUT the means, IS incon¬ 
ceivable. 
HE will provide the means to ANYONE who SHARES His 
purpose. 


T 18 F 4. 
HAPPY DREAMS COME TRUE. 
NOT because they are 
dreams, but only because they are HAPPY. 
And so they MUST be 
loving. 
Their message is, "Thy Will be done," and NOT, "I want it 
otherwise ." 629 The alignment of means and purpose is an undertak¬ 
ing IMPOSSIBLE for you to understand. 
You do not even realize 
you HAVE accepted the Holy Spirit's purpose as your own. 
And 
you would merely bring UNholy means to its accomplishment. 
The 
little faith it needed to change the purpose is all that is required to 
RECEIVE the means and USE them. 



629 Matthew 6:10 “Thy kingdom come. 
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.” 


627 


1-617 



Volume I Text 


T 18 F 5. 
It is no dream to love your brother as yourself. 
630 Nor is your 
holy relationship a dream. 
All that remains of dreams within it is 
that it is still a SPECIAL relationship. 
Yet it is VERY useful to the 
Holy Spirit, Who has a special FUNCTION here. 
It will become the 
HAPPY dream through which He can spread joy to thousands on 
thousands who believe that love is T(675) - 572 - 631 fear, NOT happi¬ 
ness. 
Let Him fulfill the function that He GAVE to your relationship 
by ACCEPTING it FOR you. 
And NOTHING will be wanting that 
would make of it what HE would have it be. 


T 18 F 6. 
When you feel the holiness of your relationship is threatened 
by ANYTHING, stop instantly and offer the Holy Spirit your will¬ 
ingness, IN SPITE of fear, to let Him exchange this instant for the 
holy one which YOU would rather have. 
He will NEVER fail in this. 

But forget not that your relationship IS ONE, and so it MUST be that 
whatever threatens the peace of one is an equal threat to the other. 

The power of joining, AND ITS BLESSING, lies in the fact that it is 
now impossible for either of you to experience fear alone, or to at¬ 
tempt to DEAL with it alone. 
Never believe that this is necessary, or 
even possible. 


T 18 F 7. 
But, just as THIS is impossible, so is it equally impossible 
that the holy instant come to either of you WITHOUT the other. 


And it WILL come to both at the REQUEST of either. 
Whichever is 
saner at the time when threat is perceived, should remember how 
deep is his indebtedness to the other, and how much gratitude is 
due him. 
AND BE GLAD that he can pay his debt, by bringing hap¬ 
piness to both. 
Let him remember this, and say: 

"I desire this holy instant for myself 


630 Leviticus 19:18 You shall not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the children of your 
people, but you shall love your neighbor as yourself: I am the LORD. 


Matthew 22:39 And the second is like it: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.” 

Mark 12:29-31 Jesus answered, “The first is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God, the Lord is one: and 
thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and 
with all thy strength. 
The second is this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
There is none other 
commandment greater than these.” 

631 These two paragraphs, 18 F 6 and 18 F 7, are not present in the Notes. 



1-618 


628 



Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


That I may SHARE it with my brother, whom I love. 


It is not possible that I can have it WITHOUT him, nor he without 
me. 


Yet it is WHOLLY possible for us to SHARE it NOW. 


And so I choose THIS instant as the one to offer to the Holy Spirit, 
that His blessing may descend on us, and keep us BOTH in peace." 
T(676) -503 632 

T 18 G. 
Dreams and the Body (Notes 1485 10:45) 

T 18 G l. 
THERE IS NOTHING OUTSIDE YOU. 
That is what you 
must ultimately learn, for it is in that realization that the Kingdom 
of Heaven is restored to you. 
For God created only this, and He did 
not depart from it, nor leave it separate from Himself. 
The Kingdom 
of Heaven is the dwelling place of the Son of God, who left not his 
Father, and dwells not apart from Him. 
Heaven is not a place nor a 
condition. 
It is merely an awareness of perfect Oneness, and the 
knowledge that there is nothing else. 
Nothing OUTSIDE THIS One¬ 
ness, and NOTHING ELSE within. 


T 18 G 2. 
What could God give, but knowledge of Himself? What else 
IS there to give? The belief that you could give AND GET some¬ 
thing, else, something OUTSIDE yourself, has cost you the aware¬ 
ness of Heaven, and the loss of knowledge of your identity. 
And 
you have done a stranger thing than you yet realize. 
You have dis¬ 
placed your guilt to your bodies, FROM YOUR MINDS. 
Yet a body 
CANNOT be guilty, for it can do nothing of itself. 
You who think 
you hate your bodies, deceive yourselves. 
YOU HATE YOUR 
MINDS, for guilt has entered into them, and they would remain 
separate, which they CANNOT DO. 


T 18 G 3. 
Minds ARE joined; bodies are not. 
Only by assigning to the 
mind the properties OF THE BODY, does separation SEEM to be 
possible. 
And it is MIND that seems to be fragmented and private 
and ALONE. 
Its guilt, which KEEPS it separate, is projected to the 


632 foH^[Feb.?] 12, 1967 


629 


1-619 



Volume I Text 


body, which suffers and dies, BECAUSE IT IS ATTACKED to hold 
the separation in the mind, and let it NOT KNOW its unity. 
Mind 
cannot attack, but it CAN make fantasies, and direct the body to act 
them out. 
But it is never what the BODY does that seems to satisfy. 

Unless the mind BELIEVES the body is ACTUALLY acting out ITS 
fantasies, it T(677) -504 will attack the body by INCREASING the pro¬ 
jection of its guilt upon it. 


T 18 G 4. 
In this, the mind is CLEARLY delusional. 
It cannot attack, 
but maintains it CAN, and USES what it does to hurt the body, to 
PROVE it can. 
The mind can not attack, but it CAN deceive itself. 

And this is ALL it does, when it believes it has attacked the body. 
It 
CAN project its guilt, but it will NOT lose it through projection. 
And 
though it clearly can MISPERCEIVE the function of the body, it 
CANNOT change its function from what the Holy Spirit ESTAB¬ 
LISHES it to be. 
The body was NOT made by love. 
But love does not 
condemn it, and can use it lovingly, respecting what the Son of God 
has made, and using it to SAVE him from illusions. 


T 18 G 5. 
Would you not have the instruments of separation RE¬ 
INTERPRETED as means for salvation, and USED for purposes of 
love? Would you not welcome AND SUPPORT the shift from fanta¬ 
sies of vengeance to RELEASE from them? Your PERCEPTION of 
the body can clearly be sick, but project this not upon the body. 
For 
your wish to make destructive what CANNOT destroy, can have no 
REAL effect at all. 
And what God created is only what He would 
have it be, being His Will. 


T 18 G 6. 
You cannot make His Will destructive. 
You can make FAN¬ 
TASIES, in which your will CONFLICTS with His, but that is all. 
It 
is insane to use the body as the scapegoat for guilt; DIRECTING its 
attack, and BLAMING it for what you wished it to do. 
IT IS IMPOS¬ 
SIBLE TO ACT OUT FANTASIES. 
For it is still the FANTASIES you 
want, and they have nothing to do with what the body does. 
T(678) - 
505 IT does not dream of them, and they but make IT a liability, 
where it COULD be an asset. 
For fantasies have made your body 


1-620 


630 



Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


your "enemy," weak, vulnerable, and treacherous, "worthy" of the 
hate which you invest in it. 


T 18 G 7. 
How has this served you? You have IDENTIFIED with this 
thing you hate, the instrument of vengeance, and the perceived 
source of your guilt. 
YOU have done this to a thing that has no 
meaning, proclaiming it to be the dwelling place of the Son of God, 
and turning it AGAINST him. 
This is the host of God that YOU have 
made. 
And neither God nor His most holy Son can enter an abode 
which harbors hate, and where you have sown the seeds of venge¬ 
ance, violence, and death. 


T 18 G 8. 
This thing you made to serve your guilt, stands between you 
and other minds. 
The minds ARE joined, but you do not IDENTIFY 
with them. 
You SEE yourself as locked in a separate prison, remote 
and unreachable, incapable of reaching out as being reached. 
You 
HATE the prison that you made, and would destroy it. 
Yet you 
would NOT escape from it, leaving it unharmed, WITHOUT your 
guilt upon it. 
But only thus CAN you escape. 
The home of venge¬ 
ance is not yours; The place you set aside to house your hatred is 
NOT a prison, but an ILLUSION OF YOURSELF. 


T 18 G 9. 
The body is a limit imposed on the universal communica¬ 
tion which is an eternal property of mind. 
But the communication is 
INTERNAL. 
Mind reaches to ITSELF. 
It is NOT made up of differ¬ 
ent PARTS, which reach each other. 
It does not go OUT. 
Within 
T(679) -506 ITSELF, it HAS no limits, and there is nothing OUTSIDE it. 

It encompasses EVERYTHING. 
It encompasses you ENTIRELY; you 
within it, and it within you. 
There IS nothing else, anywhere or ever. 

The body is OUTSIDE you, and SEEMS to surround you, shutting 
you off from others, and keeping you APART from them, and them 
from you. 


T 18 G10. 
IT IS NOT THERE. 
There IS no barrier between God and 
His Son, nor can His Son be separated from himself, except in illu¬ 
sion. 
This is NOT his reality, though he believes it IS. 
Yet this could 
only BE, IF God were wrong. 
God would have had to create DIF¬ 
FERENTLY, and to have separated HIMSELF from His Son, to make 


631 


1-621 


Volume I Text 


this possible. 
He would have had to create DIFFERENT things, and 
to establish different ORDERS of reality, only SOME of which were 
love. 
Yet love must be forever like itself, changeless forever, and for¬ 
ever WITHOUT alternative. 
And so it is. 


T 18 G 11. 
YOU cannot put a barrier around yourself, because God 
placed none between HIMSELF and you. 
Your hand can stretch out, 
and reach to Heaven. 
You whose hands are joined have begun to 
reach BEYOND the body, but NOT outside yourselves. 
To reach 
your shared identity TOGETHER. 
Could this be OUTSIDE you? 
Where God is not? Is He a body, and did He create you as He is not, 
and where He CANNOT be? You are surrounded ONLY by Him. 

What limits CAN there be on you, whom HE encompasses? 

T 18 G12. 
Everyone has experienced what he would call a sense of 
being transported BEYOND himself. 
This feeling of liberation FAR 
exceeds the DREAM of freedom sometimes experienced in special 
relationships. 
It is a sense of actual ESCAPE from limitations. 
T(680) - 
507 If you will consider what this "transportation" REALLY entails, 
you will realize that it is a sudden UNawareness of the body, and a 
joining of your self and SOMETHING ELSE, in which your mind 
ENLARGES to encompass it. 
It becomes PART of you, as you 
UNITE with it. 
And BOTH become whole, as NEITHER is perceived 
as separate. 


T 18 G13. 
What REALLY happens is that you have GIVEN UP the 
illusion of a LIMITED awareness, and lost your fear of union. 
The 
love that INSTANTLY replaces it EXTENDS to what has freed you, 
and UNITES you with it. 
And, while this lasts, you are NOT uncer¬ 
tain of your identity, and would not limit it. 
You have escaped from 
fear to peace, asking no questions of reality, but merely ACCEPT¬ 
ING it. 
You have accepted this INSTEAD of the body, and have LET 
yourself be ONE with something beyond it, simply by NOT letting 
your mind be limited BY it. 


T 18 G 14. 
This can occur REGARDLESS of the physical distance that 
SEEMS to be between you and what you join; of your respective po¬ 
sitions in space; and of your differences in size and seeming quality. 



1-622 


632 


Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


Time is not relevant; it can occur with something past, present, or 
anticipated. 
The "something" can be ANYTHING and ANY¬ 
WHERE; a sound, a sight, a thought, a memory, even a more GEN¬ 
ERAL idea, WITHOUT specific reference. 
But, in every case, you 
join it without RESERVATION, because you love it, and would BE 
with it. 
And so you rush to meet it, letting your limits melt away, 
suspending ALL the "laws" your body obeys, and gently SETTING 
THEM ASIDE. 
T(68l) -508 

T 18 G15. 
There is no violence at all in this escape. 
The body is NOT 
attacked, but merely PROPERLY PERCEIVED. 
It does not limit you, 
merely because YOU would not have it so. 
You are not really "lifted 
out" of it; it cannot CONTAIN you. 
You go where you would be; 
GAINING, NOT losing, a sense of self. 
In these instants of release 
from physical restrictions, you experience much of what happens in 
the holy instant; the lifting of the barriers of time and space, the 
sudden experience of peace and joy, and, above all, the LACK of 
awareness of the body, and of the questioning WHETHER OR NOT 
ALL THIS IS POSSIBLE. 
It IS possible, BECAUSE YOU WANT IT. 


T 18 G16. 
The sudden EXPANSION of the self that takes place with 
your DESIRE for it, is the irresistible appeal the holy instant holds. 
It 
calls to you to be yourself, within its safe embrace. 
There are the 
laws of limit lifted FOR you, to welcome you to openness of mind, 
and freedom. 
Come to this place of refuge, where you can be your¬ 
self in peace. 
NOT through destruction, NOT through a "breaking 
out," but merely by a quiet "melting in." For peace will join you 
there, simply because YOU have been willing to let go the limits 
YOU have placed on love, and JOINED it where it is, and where it 
led you, in answer to its gentle call to be at peace. 
633 T(682)T(63la) 634 


1.1 633 The next 3 pages from the Special Messages are out of chronological and 

NUMERICAL ORDER IN HLC. 
IT IS THE HLC SEQUENCE AND CHAPTER/SECTION HEADINGS AND 
ORDER BEING USED HERE. 


634 SPECIAL MESSAGE May 31, 1967 


633 


1-623 




Volume I Text 

T 18 H. 
"I Need Do Nothing" (Notes 1689 11:64) 

T 18 H l. 
You still have too much faith in the body as a source of 
strength. 
What plans do you make that do NOT involve its comfort 
or protection or enjoyment in some way? This makes it an end and 
not a means in your interpretation, and this ALWAYS means YOU 
STILL FIND SIN ATTRACTIVE. 
No-one accepts Atonement for 
himself who still accepts sin as his goal. 
You have thus not met your 
one responsibility. 
Atonement is not welcomed by those who PRE¬ 
FER pain and destruction. 


T 18 H 2. 
You have made much progress, and are really trying to 
make still more, but there is one thing you have never done; not for 
one instant have you utterly forgotten the body. 
It has faded at 
times from your sight, but it has not yet COMPLETELY DISAP¬ 
PEARED. 
You are not asked to let this happen for more than an in¬ 
stant, but it is in this instant that the miracle of Atonement happens. 

Afterwards, you will see the body again, but never quite the same. 

And every instant that you spend WITHOUT awareness of it gives 
you a different view of it, when you return. 


T 18 H 3. 
At no SINGLE instant does the body exist at all. 
It is always 
remembered or anticipated, but NEVER experienced just now. 
Only 
its past and future make it seem real. 
Time controls it entirely. 
For 
sin is never present. 
In any SINGLE instant, the attraction of guilt 
would be experienced as pain and nothing else, and would be 
avoided. 
IT HAS NO ATTRACTION NOW. 
Its whole attraction is 
imaginary, and therefore MUST be thought of from the past, or in 
the future. 


T 18 H 4. 
It is impossible to accept the holy instant WITHOUT RES¬ 
ERVATION unless, JUST FOR AN INSTANT, you are willing to see 
no past or future. 
You cannot PREPARE for it without placing it in 
the FUTURE. 
Release is given you the INSTANT you desire it. 
Many 
have spent a lifetime in preparation, and have, indeed, achieved 
their instants of success. 
This course does not attempt to teach more 

than they learned in time. 
But it does aim at SAVING time. 
T(683) 
T(631b) 


1-624 


634 


Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


T 18 H 5. 
You are attempting to follow a very long road to the goal 
you have accepted. 
It is extremely difficult to reach Atonement by 
fighting against sin. 
Enormous effort is expended in the attempt to 
make holy what is hated and despised. 
Nor is a lifetime of contem¬ 
plation, and long periods of meditation aimed at DETACHMENT 
from the body necessary. 
All such attempts will ultimately succeed, 
because of their purpose. 
But the means are tedious and very time 
consuming, for all of them LOOK TO THE FUTURE for release from 
a state of present unworthiness and inadequacy. 


T 18 H 6. 
Your way will be different. 
NOT in purpose, but in means. 


A HOLY RELATIONSHIP IS A MEANS OF SAVING TIME. 
One 
instant spent TOGETHER restores the universe to BOTH of you. 


You ARE prepared. 
Now you need but remember YOU NEED DO 
NOTHING. 
It would be FAR more profitable now merely to concen¬ 
trate on this, than to consider what you SHOULD do. 


T 18 H 7. 
When peace comes at last to those who wrestle with tempta¬ 
tion, and fight against giving in to sin; when the light comes at last 
into the mind given to contemplation, or when the goal is finally 
achieved by anyone, it ALWAYS comes with just ONE happy reali¬ 
zation, — "I need do nothing." Here is the ultimate release that eve¬ 
ryone will one day find in his own way, at his own time. 
We do not 
need this time. 
Time has been SAVED for you, because you are to¬ 
gether. 
This is the special means this course is using, to save you 
time. 


T 18 H 8. 
You are not making use of the course if you insist on using 
means that have served others well, neglecting what was made for 
YOU. 
Save time for me by only this one preparation, and practice 
doing NOTHING ELSE. 
"I need do nothing" is a statement of alle¬ 
giance, a truly undivided loyalty. 
Believe it for just one instant, and 
you will accomplish more than is given to a century of contempla¬ 
tion, or of struggle against temptation. 
T(684)T(631c) 

T 18 H 9. 
To DO anything involves the body. 
And, if you recognize 
you NEED do nothing, you HAVE withdrawn the body's value 
from your mind. 
Here is the quick and open door through which 


635 


1-625 


Volume I Text 


you slip past centuries of effort, and ESCAPE from time. 
This is the 
way in which sin loses ALL attraction RIGHT NOW. 
For here is 
time denied, and past and future gone. 
Who need do nothing has no 
need for time. 
To do nothing is to rest, and make a place within you 
where the activity of the body ceases to demand attention. 
Into this 
place the Holy Spirit comes, and there abides. 


T 18 H 10. 
He will remain when you forget, and the body's activities 
return to occupy your conscious mind. 
But there will always be this 
place of rest, to which you can return. 
And you will be more aware 
of the quiet center of the storm, than all its raging activity. 
This quiet 
center, IN WHICH YOU DO NOTHING, will remain with you, giv¬ 
ing you rest in the midst of every busy doing on which you are sent. 

For, FROM this center, will you be directed how to use the body 
sinlessly. 
It is this center, from which the body is ABSENT, that will 
keep it so, in your awareness of it. 
T(685) 509. 
635 

T 18 I. 
The Purpose of the Body (Notes 1495 10:55) 

T 18 11 . 
It is only the awareness of the body that makes love seem 
limited. 
For the body IS a limit on love. 
The belief in limited love 
was its origin, and it was MADE to limit the UNlimited. 
Think not 
that this is merely allegorical; for it was made to limit YOU. 
Can you 
who see yourselves WITHIN a body, know yourself AS AN IDEA? 
Everything you recognize you identify by EXTERNALS, something 
OUTSIDE itself. 
You cannot even think of GOD without a body, or 
some form you think you recognize. 
The body cannot KNOW. 
And 
while you limit your awareness to its tiny senses, you will not see 
the grandeur that surrounds you. 


T 18 12 . 
God cannot come into a body, nor can you join Him there. 

Limits on love will ALWAYS seem to shut Him out, and to keep you 
APART from Him. 
The body is a tiny fence around a little part of a 
glorious and completely limitless idea. 
It draws a circle, infinitely 
small, around a very little segment of Heaven, splintered from the 
whole, proclaiming that, within it, is YOUR Kingdom, where God 


635 Feb. 
16, 1967 


1-626 


636 



Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


can enter not. 
Within this kingdom the ego rules, and cruelly. 
And, 
to defend this little speck of dust, it bids you fight against the uni¬ 
verse. 


T 18 13. 
This fragment of your mind is such a tiny part of it that, 
could you but appreciate the whole, you would see instantly that it 
is like the smallest sunbeam is to the sun. 
Or like the faintest ripple 
on the surface of the ocean. 
In its amazing arrogance, this tiny sun¬ 
beam has decided it IS the sun; this almost imperceptible ripple 
hails itself as the ocean. 
Think how alone and frightened is this little 
thought, this infinitesimal illusion, holding itself apart, against the 
universe. 
The sun becomes the sunbeam's "enemy," which would 
devour it. 
And the ocean terrifies the little ripple, and "wants" to 
swallow it. 
T(686) -510. 


T 1814. 
Yet neither sun nor ocean is even aware of all this strange 
and meaningless activity. 
They merely continue, unaware that they 
are feared and hated by a tiny segment of themselves. 
Even that seg¬ 
ment is not LOST to them, for it could not survive APART from 
them And what IT thinks it is in no way changes its total depend¬ 
ence on them FOR ITS BEING. 
Its whole existence still remains IN 
THEM. 
Without the sun, the sunbeam WOULD be gone; the ripple 
WITHOUT the ocean IS inconceivable. 


T 18 I 5. 
Such is the strange position in which those in a world inhab¬ 
ited by bodies seem to be. 
Each body seems to house a SEPARATE 
mind, a DISCONNECTED thought, living alone and in no way 
joined to the Thought by which it was created. 
Each tiny fragment 
seems to be self-contained, needing each other for SOME things, but 
by no means TOTALLY dependent on their One Creator for EVE¬ 
RYTHING. 
And needing the whole to give them ANY meaning, for 
by themselves, they DO mean nothing. 
Nor HAVE they any life 
apart, and by themselves. 


T 18 16 . 
Yet, like the sun and ocean, your Self continues, unmindful 
that this tiny part regards ITSELF as you. 
It is not missing; it could 
not EXIST if it were separate, nor would the whole BE whole with¬ 
out it. 
It is not a separate kingdom, ruled by an IDEA of separation 


637 


1-627 


Volume I Text 


from the rest. 
Nor does a fence surround it, preventing it from JOIN¬ 
ING with the rest, and keeping it apart from its Creator. 
This little 
aspect is NO DIFFERENT from the whole, being continuous with it, 
and at one with it. 
It leads no separate life, because its life IS in the 
Oneness in which its being was created. 


T 1817. 
Do not accept this little, fenced-off aspect as your Self. 
The 
sun and ocean are as nothing, beside what YOU are. 
The sunbeam 
sparkles only in the sunlight, and the ripple dances as it rests upon 
the ocean. 
Yet in neither sun nor ocean is the power that rests in 
you. 
Would you remain WITHIN your tiny kingdom, a sorry king, a 
bitter ruler of all he surveys, who T(687) -511 looks on nothing, but 
who would still die to DEFEND it? This little self is NOT your king¬ 
dom. 
Arched high above it, and surrounding it, with love, is the glo¬ 
rious whole, which offers all its happiness and deep content to 
EVERY part. 


T 18 18 . 
The little aspect that you think you set apart is no exception. 

Love knows no bodies, and reaches to everything created like itself. 

Its total lack of limit IS its meaning. 
It is COMPLETELY impartial in 
its giving, encompassing ONLY to preserve and KEEP COMPLETE 
what it would give. 
In your tiny kingdom you have so little! Should 
it not, then, be there that you would call on love to enter? Look at 
the desert, dry and unproductive, scorched and joyless, that makes 
up your little kingdom. 
And realize the life and joy that love would 
bring to it, from where IT comes, and where it would return WITH 
you. 


T 18 19. 
The Thought of God surrounds your little kingdom, waiting 
at the barrier you built, to come in and shine upon the barren 
ground. 
See how life springs up everywhere! The desert becomes a 
garden, green and deep and quiet, offering rest to those who lost 
their way, and wander in the dust. 
636 Give them a place of refuge. 



636 Isaiah 51:3 For the LORD will comfort Zion, 
He will comfort all her waste places; 

He will make her wilderness like Eden, 

And her desert like the garden of the LORD; 
Joy and gladness will be found in it, 


1-628 


638 



Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


prepared by love for them, where once a desert was. 
And every one 
you welcome will bring love with him, from Heaven for you. 
They 
enter one by one into this holy place, but they will not depart as they 
had come, alone. 


T 18 1 to. 
The love they BROUGHT with them will STAY with them, 
as it will stay with YOU. 
And, under its beneficence, your little gar¬ 
den will expand, and reach out to everyone who thirsts for living 
water, but has grown too weary to go on alone. 
637 Go out and FIND 
them, for they bring your Self with them. 
And lead them gently to 
your quiet garden, and receive their blessing there. 
So will it grow, 
and stretch across the desert, leaving no lonely little kingdoms 
locked away from love, and leaving YOU outside. 
T(688) -512 And 
you will RECOGNIZE yourself, and see your little garden gently 
transformed into the Kingdom of Heaven, with all the love of its 
Creator shining upon it. 


T 18 111. 
The holy instant is your invitation to love, to enter into your 
bleak and joyless kingdom, and transform it into a garden of peace 
and welcome. 
Love's answer is inevitable. 
It will come, because you 
came WITHOUT the body, and interposed no barriers which would 
INTERFERE with its glad coming. 
In the holy instant, you ask of 
love only what it offers everyone, neither less nor more. 
Asking for 
EVERYTHING, you will RECEIVE it. 
And your shining Self will lift 
the tiny aspect that you tried to hide from Heaven, straight into 
Heaven. 
No part of love calls on the whole in vain. 
No son of God 
remains OUTSIDE His Fatherhood. 


T 18112. 
Be sure of this; love has entered your special relationship, 
and entered fully, at your weak request. 
You do NOT recognize that 
love has come, because you have not yet let go of ALL the barriers 


Thanksgiving and the voice of melody. 


637 Jeremiah 2:13 For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of 
living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water. 


John 4:10 Jesus answered and said to her, “If you knew the gift of God, and who it is who says to you, 
‘Give Me a drink,’ you would have asked Him, and He would have given you living water.” 

John 7:38 “He who believes in Me, as the Scripture has said, out of his heart will flow rivers of living 
water.” 


639 


1-629 



Volume I Text 


you hold against EACH OTHER. 
And you will NOT be able to give 
love welcome separately. 
You could no more know God alone, than 
He knows YOU without your brother. 
But, TOGETHER, you could 
no more be UNAWARE of love, than love could know you not, or 
fail to recognize ITSELF in you. 


T 18 113. 
You have reached the end of an ancient journey not realiz¬ 
ing yet that it is over. 
You are still worn and tired, and the desert's 
dust still seems to cloud your eyes, and keep you sightless. 
Yet He 
Whom you welcomed has come to you, and would welcome YOU. 

He has waited long to give you this. 
Receive it now of Him, for He 
would have you KNOW Him. 
Only a little wall of dust still stands 
between you. 
Blow on it lightly and with happy laughter, and it will 
fall away. 
And walk into the garden love has prepared for BOTH of 
you. 
T(689) -513 

T 18 J. 
The Delusional Thought System (Notes 1503 10:63) 

T 18 J 1 . 
You have been told to bring the darkness to the light, and 
guilt to holiness. 
And you have also been told that error must be 
corrected at its source. 
Therefore, it is the tiny part of your self, the 
little thought that seems split off and separate, that the Holy Spirit 
needs. 
The rest is fully in God's keeping, and needs no guide. 
But 
this wild and delusional thought needs help, because, in its delu¬ 
sions, it thinks it is the Son of God, whole and omnipotent, sole ruler 
of the kingdom it set apart, to tyrannize by madness into obedience 
and slavery. 


T 18 J 2. 
This is the LITTLE part of you, you think you stole from 
Heaven. 
Give it back to Heaven. 
Heaven has not lost it, but YOU 
have lost sight of Heaven. 
Let the Holy Spirit remove it from the 
withered kingdom in which you set it up, surrounded by darkness, 
guarded by attack, and reinforced by hate. 
Within its barricades is 
still a tiny segment of the Son of God, complete and holy, serene and 
unaware of what you think surrounds it. 
Be you not separate, for 


1-630 


640 



Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


the One Who DOES surround it has brought union to you, returning 
your little offering of darkness to the Eternal Light. 
T(690) -514 638 
T 18 J 3. 
How 639 is this done? It is extremely simple, being based on 
what this little kingdom really IS. 
The barren sands, the darkness, 
and the lifelessness are seen only through the body's eyes. 
ITS vi¬ 
sion IS distorted, and the messages IT transmits to you, who MADE 
it to limit your awareness, ARE little and limited, so fragmented that 
they are meaningless. 
From the world of bodies, MADE by insanity, 
insane messages seem to be returned to the mind which made it. 

And these messages bear witness to this world, pronouncing it as 
true. 
For YOU sent forth these messengers, to bring this BACK to 
you. 
640 

T 18 J 4. 
Everything these messages relay to you is quite external. 

There are NO messages that speak of what lies underneath, for it is 
NOT the body that could speak of this. 
Its eyes perceive it not, its 
senses remain quite UNAWARE of it, its tongue can not relay ITS 
messages. 
Yet God can bring you there, if you are willing to follow 
the Holy Spirit through seeming terror, trusting Him not to abandon 
you, and LEAVE you there. 
For it is not HIS purpose to frighten 
you, but only YOURS. 
YOU are severely tempted to abandon HIM 
at the outside ring of fear. 
But HE would lead you safely through, 
and FAR beyond. 


T 18 J 5. 
The circle of fear lies just below the level the body sees, and 
SEEMS to be the whole foundation on which the world is based. 

Here are all the illusions, all the twisted thoughts, all the insane at¬ 
tacks, the fury, vengeance, and betrayal that were made to keep the 
guilt in place, so that the world could RISE from it, and keep IT hid- 


638 Feb. 
20, 1967 

639 Feb. 
20, 1967 

1,411 John 1:7-8 This man came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all through him might 
believe. 
He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. 


John 18:37 Pilate therefore said to Him, “Are You a king then?” 

Jesus answered, “You say rightly that I am a king. 
For this cause I was bom, and for this cause I have 
come into the world, that I should bear witness to the tmth. 
Everyone who is of the tmth hears My 
voice.” 


641 


1-631 



Volume I Text 


den. 
Its SHADOW rises to the surface, enough to hold its most ex¬ 
ternal manifestations 641 in darkness, and to bring despair and loneli¬ 
ness to it, and keep it joyless. 
But its INTENSITY is veiled by its 
heavy coverings, and kept APART from what was made to keep it 
hidden. 
T(691) -515 

T 18 J 6. 
The body cannot see this, for the body AROSE from this for 
its protection, which must ALWAYS depend on keeping it NOT 
seen. 
The body's eyes will NEVER look on it. 
Yet they will SEE what 
it dictates. 
The body will remain guilt's messenger, and will act as it 
directs, as long as YOU believe that guilt is real. 
For the REALITY of 
guilt is the illusion which seems to make it heavy and opaque, im¬ 
penetrable, and a REAL foundation for the ego's thought system. 
Its 
thinness and transparency are not apparent, until you see the light 
BEHIND it. 
And then you see it as a fragile veil, before the light. 


T 18 J 7. 
This heavy-seeming barrier, this artificial floor that looks like 
rock, is like a bank of low, dark clouds that seem to be a solid wall 
before the sun. 
Its impenetrable appearance is WHOLLY an illusion. 

It gives way softly to the mountain tops that rise above it, and has 
no power at all to hold back anyone willing to climb above it, to see 
the sun. 
It is not strong enough to stop a button's fall, nor hold a 
feather. 
Nothing can rest upon it, for it is but an ILLUSION of a 
foundation. 
Try but to touch it, and it disappears; attempt to grasp 
it, and your hands hold nothing. 


T 18 J 8. 
Yet in this cloud bank it is easy to see a whole world rising. 


A solid mountain range, a lake, a city, all arise in your imagination, 
and FROM the clouds, the messengers of your perception return to 
you, assuring you that it is all THERE. 
Figures stand out and move 
about, actions seem real, and forms appear and shift from loveliness 
to the grotesque. 
And back and forth they go, as long as you would 
play the game of children's "make believe." Yet, however long you 
play it, and regardless of how much imagination you bring to it, you 


641 The Urtext manuscript has this singular, but the Notes and HLC have it pluralized which seems more 
correct. 



1-632 


642 



Chapter 18 - The Dream and the Reality 


do NOT confuse it with the world below, nor seek to make it real. 

T(692)-516 

T 18 J 9. 
So should it be with the dark clouds of guilt, no more im¬ 
penetrable and no more substantial. 
You will NOT bruise yourself 
against them, in traveling through. 
Let your Guide TEACH you 
their UNsubstantial nature, as He leads you PAST them. 
For BE¬ 
NEATH them is a world of light, whereon they cast no shadows. 

Their shadows lie upon the world BEYOND them, still FURTHER 
from the light. 
But from them TO the light, their shadows CANNOT 
fall. 
This world of light, this circle of brightness, is the real world, 
where guilt meets with forgiveness. 
Here, the world OUTSIDE is 
seen anew, WITHOUT the shadow of guilt upon it. 


T 18 J10 . 
Here are YOU forgiven, for here you have forgiven every¬ 
one. 
Here is the new perception, where everything is bright and 
shining with innocence, washed in the waters of forgiveness, and 
cleansed of every evil thought you laid upon it. 
Here there is no at¬ 
tack upon the Son of God, and YOU are welcome. 
Here is your in¬ 
nocence, waiting to clothe you and protect you, and make you ready 
for the final step in the journey inward. 
Here are the dark and heavy 
garments of guilt laid by, and gently replaced by purity and joy. 


T 18 J11. 
Yet even forgiveness is not the end. 
Forgiveness DOES 
make lovely, but it does NOT create. 
It IS the source of healing, but 
it is the MESSENGER of love, and not its Source. 
Here you are led, 
that God Himself can take the final step unhindered. 
For here does 
nothing INTERFERE with love, letting it be Itself. 
A step BEYOND 
this holy place of forgiveness. 
A step still further inward, but one 
you CANNOT take, transports you to something COMPLETELY 
different. 
Here is the Source of light; nothing perceived, forgiven, 
nor transformed. 
But merely KNOWN. 


T 18 K. 
The Passing of the Dream (Notes 1510 10:70) 

T 18 K l. 
This course will LEAD to knowledge, but knowledge itself is 
still beyond the scope of our curriculum. 
Nor is there any need for 
us to try to speak of what must forever lie beyond words. 
We need 
remember only that T(693) -517 whoever attains the real world, be- 


643 


1-633 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume I Text 


yond which learning cannot go, WILL go beyond it, but in a differ¬ 
ent way. 
Where learning ends, there God begins, for learning ends 
before Him Who is complete where He begins, and where there IS 
no end. 


T 18 K 2. 
It is not for us to dwell on what cannot BE attained. 
There is 
too much to learn. 
The readiness for knowledge still must be at¬ 
tained. 
Love is not learned. 
Its meaning lies in Itself. 
And learning 
ends when you have recognized all it is NOT. 
That is the INTER¬ 
FERENCE; that is what needs to be undone. 
Love is not learned, be¬ 
cause there never WAS a time in which you knew it not. 
Learning is 
useless in the Presence of your Creator, Whose ACKNOWLEDG¬ 
MENT of you, AND YOURS OF HIM, so FAR transcends ALL 
learning, that EVERYTHING you learned is meaningless, replaced 
forever by the knowledge of love and its One meaning. 


T 18 K 3. 
Your relationship has been uprooted from the world of 
shadows, and its unholy purpose has been safely brought through 
the barriers of guilt, washed with forgiveness, and set shining and 
firmly rooted in the world of light. 
From there it calls to you to fol¬ 
low the course it took, lifted high above the darkness, and gently 
placed before the gates of Heaven. 
The holy instant in which you 
were united, is but a messenger of love, sent from BEYOND for¬ 
giveness to REMIND you of all that lies beyond it. 
Yet it is 
THROUGH forgiveness that it will BE remembered. 


T 18 K 4. 
And when the memory of God has come to you, in the holy 
place of forgiveness, you will remember nothing else. 
And memory 
will be as useless as learning, for your ONLY purpose will be creat¬ 
ing. 
Yet this you cannot know, until every perception has been 
cleansed and purified, and finally removed forever. 
Forgiveness re¬ 
moves ONLY the UNtrue, lifting the shadows from the world, and 
carrying it, safe and sure within its gentleness, to the bright world of 
new and clean perception. 
There is YOUR purpose now. 
And it is 
there that peace awaits you. 
T(694) -518 642 


642 Feb. 
23, 1967 


1-634 


644 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 

T 19 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1513 10:73) 

T 19 A l. 
We said before that, when a situation has been dedicated 
WHOLLY to truth, peace is inevitable. 
Its attainment is the criterion 
by which the wholeness of the dedication can be safely assumed. 

But we also said that peace without faith will NEVER be attained, 
for what is WHOLLY dedicated to truth as its ONLY goal is 
BROUGHT to truth by faith. 
This faith encompasses EVERYONE 
involved, for only thus the situation is perceived as meaningful and 
as a WHOLE. 
And everyone must BE involved in it, or else YOUR 
faith is limited, and your dedication incomplete. 


T 19 A 2. 
Every situation, properly perceived, becomes an opportu¬ 
nity to heal the Son of God. 
And he is healed BECAUSE you offered 
faith to him, giving him to the Holy Spirit and RELEASING him 
from every demand your ego would make of him. 
Thus do you SEE 
HIM FREE, and in this vision does the Holy Spirit SHARE. 
And 
since He SHARES it He HAS given it, and so He healed THROUGH 
YOU. 
It is this JOINING Him in a UNITED purpose that MAKES 
this purpose real, because YOU make it WHOLE. 
And this IS heal¬ 
ing. 
The BODY is healed BECAUSE YOU CAME WITHOUT IT, and 
joined the Mind in which all healing rests. 


T 19 B. 
Healing and the Mind (Notes 1514 10:74) 

T 19 B l. 
The body cannot heal, because it cannot MAKE ITSELF 
SICK. 
It NEEDS no healing. 
Its health or sickness depends EN¬ 
TIRELY on how the mind perceives it, and the purpose which the 
mind would use it FOR. 
And it IS obvious that a segment of the 
mind CAN see itself as SEPARATED from the Universal Purpose. 

When this occurs, the body becomes its weapon, used AGAINST 
this Purpose to DEMONSTRATE the "fact" that separation HAS oc¬ 
curred. 
The body thus becomes the instrument of illusion, acting 
accordingly, seeing what is not there, HEARING what truth has 


645 


1-635 


Volume I Text 


never said, and BEHAVING INSANELY, being imprisoned BY in¬ 
sanity. 
T(695) -519 

T 19 B 2. 
Do not overlook our earlier statement that faithlessness 
leads straight to illusions. 
For faithlessness IS the perception of a 
brother AS a body, and the body CANNOT be used for purposes of 
union. 
If, then, you SEE him as a body, YOU have established a 
condition in which UNITING with him becomes impossible. 
Your 
faithlessness to him has separated you FROM him, and kept you 
BOTH apart from being healed. 
Your faithlessness has thus OP¬ 
POSED the Holy Spirit's purpose, and brought illusions, CEN¬ 
TERED ON THE BODY, to stand BETWEEN you. 
And the body 
WILL seem to be sick, for you have made of it an "enemy" of heal¬ 
ing, and the OPPOSITE of truth. 


T 19 B 3. 
It CANNOT be difficult to realize that faith MUST be the 
opposite of faithLESSness. 
But the difference in how they operate is 
less apparent, though it follows directly from the fundamental dif¬ 
ference in what they ARE. 
Faithlessness would always LIMIT AND 
ATTACK; faith would remove ALL limitations, and MAKE 
WHOLE. 
Faithlessness would destroy and SEPARATE; faith would 
unite and HEAL. 
Faithlessness would interpose illusions between 
the Son of God and his Creator; faith would remove ALL obstacles 
that SEEM to rise between them. 
Faithlessness is wholly dedicated 
to illusions; faith wholly to truth. 


T 19 B 4. 
PARTIAL DEDICATION IS IMPOSSIBLE. 
Truth is the AB¬ 
SENCE of illusion; illusion the ABSENCE of truth. 
Both cannot BE 
together, nor perceived in the SAME PLACE. 
To dedicate yourself 
to BOTH, is to set up a goal forever impossible to attain. 
For PART 
of it is sought through the body, THOUGHT OF as a means for 
seeking out reality through ATTACK. 
While the OTHER part would 
HEAL, and therefore calls upon the mind, and NOT the body. 
The 
INEVITABLE compromise is the belief that the BODY must be 
healed, and NOT the mind. 
For this divided goal has given both an 
EQUAL reality, and can SEEM to be possible only if the mind is lim- 


1-636 


646 


Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


ited TO the body, and divided into little parts with SEEMING 
wholeness, but WITHOUT CONNECTION. 
T(696) -520 
T 19 B 5. 
This will NOT harm the body. 
But it WILL keep the delu¬ 
sional thought-system IN THE MIND. 
Here, then, is healing needed. 

And it is here that healing IS. 
For God gave healing not APART 
from sickness, nor established remedy where sickness CANNOT be. 

They ARE together, and when they are SEEN together, ALL at¬ 
tempts to KEEP both truth AND illusion in the mind, where both 
MUST be, are recognized as DEDICATION TO ILLUSION. 
And 
GIVEN UP when BROUGHT to truth, and seen as totally UN- 
RECONCILABLE with truth, in ANY aspect, or in any WAY. 


T 19 B 6. 
Truth and illusion HAVE no connection. 
This will remain 
FOREVER true, however much YOU seek to connect them. 
But IL¬ 
LUSIONS are ALWAYS connected, AS IS TRUTH. 
Each is united, a 
COMPLETE thought-system, but totally Disconnected to EACH 
OTHER. 
Where there is NO overlap, there separation MUST be 
complete. 
And to perceive THIS is to recognize where separation IS, 
and WHERE IT MUST BE HEALED. 
The RESULT of an idea is 
NEVER separate from its source. 
The IDEA of separation PRO¬ 
DUCED the body, and remains connected TO it, MAKING it sick 
because of its identification WITH it. 


T 19 B 7. 
You THINK you are PROTECTING the body by HIDING 
this connection. 
For this concealment SEEMS to keep your identifi¬ 
cation safe from the "attack" of truth. 
If you but understood how 
much this strange concealment has hurt your mind, and how con¬ 
fused your own identification has become to you, BECAUSE of it! 
You do NOT see how great the devastation wrought by your faith¬ 
lessness. 
For faithlessness IS an attack, which SEEMS to be justified 
BY ITS RESULTS. 
For, by WITHHOLDING faith, you SEE what IS 
unworthy of it, and CANNOT look beyond the barrier to what is 
joined with YOU. 


T 19 B 8. 
To have faith is to heal. 
It is the sign that you HAVE ac¬ 
cepted the Atonement for yourself, and would therefore share it. 
By 
faith, you OFFER the gift of freedom from the past, which you have 


647 


1-637 


Volume I Text 


RECEIVED. 
You do NOT use ANYTHING your brother has done 
before to condemn him NOW. 
You freely choose to OVERLOOK 
T(697) -521 his errors, looking PAST all barriers between your self and 
his, and seeing them AS ONE. 
And in that One you see your faith is 
FULLY justified. 
There IS no justification for faithlessness. 
But faith 
is ALWAYS justified . 
643 

T 19 B 9. 
Faith is the OPPOSITE of fear, as much a part of love, as fear 
is of attack. 
Faith is the acknowledgment of UNION. 
It is the gra¬ 
cious acknowledgment of everyone as a Son of your most loving 
Father, loved by Him like 644 you, and therefore loved by you as 
yourself. 
It is HIS Love that joins you, and FOR His Love, you 
would keep no-one separate from YOURS. 
Each one APPEARS just 
as he is perceived in the holy instant, united in YOUR purpose to be 
RELEASED from guilt. 
You saw the Christ in him, and he was 
healed, because you looked on what makes faith FOREVER justified 
in EVERYONE. 


T 19 B 10. 
Faith is the gift of God, through Him Whom God has 
GIVEN you . 
645 Faithlessness looks upon the Son of God, and judges 
him UNWORTHY of forgiveness. 
But, through the eyes of faith, the 
Son of God is seen ALREADY forgiven, free of all the guilt he laid 
upon himself. 
Faith sees him only NOW, because it looks not to the 
past to judge him, but would see in him ONLY what it would see in 
YOU. 
It sees NOT through the body's eyes, nor looks to bodies for 
its justification. 
It is the messenger of the NEW perception, sent 
forth to gather witnesses unto its coming, and to return their mes¬ 
sages to YOU. 


T 19 B 11. 
Faith is as easily exchanged for knowledge as is the real 
world. 
For faith ARISES from the Holy Spirit's perception, and is the 


643 Romans 3:28 Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith apart from the deeds of the law. 

Romans 5:1 Therefore, having been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ, 

644 Very oddly, the Urtext manuscript has “like” crossed out and “as” handwritten in. 
All other 
versions, including the Notes , have it as “like” so we leave it as originally typed, as did the Scribes 
themselves when they copied this to the HLC. 


645 Ephesians 2:8 For by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the 
gift of God, 


1-638 


648 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


sign you share it WITH Him. 
Faith is a gift you offer to the Son of 
God THROUGH Him, and WHOLLY acceptable to his Father as to 
him. 
And therefore offered YOU. 
Your holy relationship, with its 
NEW purpose, offers you faith to give unto EACH OTHER. 
Your 
faithlessness had driven you APART, and so you did not RECOG¬ 
NIZE salvation in each other. 
But faith UNITES you in the holiness 
you see, NOT through the body's eyes, but in the sight of Him Who 
T(698) -522 joined you, and in Whom YOU are united. 


T 19 B 12. 
Grace is not given to a BODY, but to a MIND. 
And the 
mind that RECEIVES it, looks INSTANTLY beyond the body, and 
sees the holy place where IT was healed. 
THERE is the altar where 
the grace was given, in which IT stands. 
Do you, then, offer grace 
and BLESSING to each other, for you stand at the SAME altar, 
where grace was laid for BOTH of you. 
And be you healed by grace 
TOGETHER, that YOU may heal through faith. 


T 19 B 13. 
In the holy instant, you stand before the altar God has 
raised unto Himself and BOTH of you. 
Lay faithlessness aside, and 
come to it TOGETHER. 
There will you see the miracle of your rela¬ 
tionship, as it was MADE AGAIN through faith. 
And there it is that 
you will realize that there is NOTHING faith can NOT forgive. 
NO 
error INTERFERES with its calm sight, which brings the miracle of 
healing with equal ease to ALL of them. 
For what the messengers of 
love are sent to do THEY DO. 
Returning the glad tidings that it was 
done, to you who stand before the altar from which they were sent 
forth, TOGETHER . 
646 

T 19 B 14. 
As faithlessness will keep your little kingdoms barren and 
separate, so will faith help the Holy Spirit prepare the ground for 
the most holy garden that He would make of it. 
For faith brings 
peace, and so it calls on truth to enter and make lovely, what has 
already BEEN prepared for loveliness. 
Truth FOLLOWS faith and 


646 Luke 1:19 And the angel answered and said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of 
God, and was sent to speak to you and bring you these glad tidings.” 

Luke 8:1 Now it came to pass, afterward, that He went through every city and village, preaching and 
bringing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God. 
And the twelve were with Him, 


649 


1-639 



Volume I Text 


peace, completing the process of making lovely that they begin. 
For 
faith is still a learning goal, no longer needed when the lesson has 
been learned. 
*But Truth will stay forever. 


T 19 B 15. 
Let, then, your dedication be to the eternal. 
And learn how 
NOT to interfere with it, and make it slave to time. 
For what you 
think you do to the eternal, you do to YOU. 
Whom God created as 
His Son is slave to nothing, being lord of all, along with his Creator. 

You CAN enslave a body, but an IDEA is free, INCAPABLE of be¬ 
ing kept in prison, or limited in ANY way, T(699) -523 EXCEPT BY 
THE MIND THAT THOUGHT IT. 
For it remains JOINED to its 
source, which is its jailor or its liberator, according to which it 
chooses as ITS purpose FOR ITSELF . 
647 

T 19 C. 
Sin versus Error (Notes 1524 10:84) 

T 19 C 1 . 
It is ESSENTIAL that error be not confused with "sin." And 
it is this distinction which makes salvation possible. 
For error can be 
corrected, and the wrong made right. 
But sin, were it possible, 
WOULD be irreversible. 
The belief in sin is necessarily based on the 
firm conviction that minds, NOT bodies, can attack. 
And thus the 
mind IS guilty, and will forever so remain, unless a mind NOT part 
of it can give it absolution. 
Sin calls for punishment, as error for cor¬ 
rection. 
And the belief that punishment IS correction, is clearly in¬ 
sane. 


T 19 C 2. 
Sin is not error. 
For sin entails an arrogance which the idea 
of error lacks. 
To sin would be to violate reality, AND TO SUC¬ 
CEED. 
Sin is the proclamation that attack is real, and guilt is JUSTI¬ 
FIED. 
It assumes the Son of God IS guilty, and has thus SUC¬ 
CEEDED in losing his innocence, and making himself what God 
created NOT. 
Thus is creation seen as NOT eternal, and the Will of 
God open to opposition AND DEFEAT. 
Sin is the "grand illusion" 
underlying ALL the ego's grandiosity. 
For BY it, God HIMSELF is 
changed, and rendered incomplete. 


647 Feb. 
24, 1967 


1-640 


650 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


T 19 c 3. 
The Son of God CAN be mistaken; he CAN deceive himself; 
he can even turn the power of his mind AGAINST himself. 
But he 
can NOT sin. 
There is NOTHING he can do that would REALLY 
change his reality in ANY way, nor make him REALLY guilty. 
That 
is what sin WOULD do, for such is its PURPOSE. 
Yet, for all the 
wild insanity inherent in the whole IDEA of sin, IT IS IMPOSSIBLE. 


For the wages of sin IS death, 648 and how can the immortal die? 

T(700)-524 

T 19 C 4. 
A MAJOR tenet in the ego's insane religion is that sin is 
NOT error, but TRUTH. 
And it is INNOCENCE that would deceive. 

PURITY is seen as arrogance, and the acceptance of the self AS SIN¬ 
FUL is perceived as holiness. 
And it is this doctrine that REPLACES 
the reality of the Son of God, as his Father created him, and willed 
that he be forever. 
Is this HUMILITY? Or is it rather an attempt to 
wrest creation AWAY from truth, and keep it separate? 

T 19 C 5. 
ANY attempt to re-interpret sin as error is wholly indefensi¬ 
ble to the ego. 
The IDEA of sin is WHOLLY sacrosanct in its 
thought-system, and quite unapproachable except through rever¬ 
ence and awe. 
It is the most "holy" concept in the ego's system; 
lovely and powerful, wholly true, and NECESSARILY protected 
with every defense at its disposal. 
For here lies its "best" defense, 
which all the others serve. 
Here is its armor, its protection, and the 
fundamental PURPOSE of the special relationship, in its interpreta¬ 
tion. 


T 19 C 6. 
It can indeed be said the ego MADE its world on sin. 
Only in 
such a world COULD everything be upside down. 
This IS the 
strange illusion which makes the clouds of guilt seem heavy and 
impenetrable. 
The solidness this world's foundation SEEMS to have 
is FOUND in this. 
For sin HAS changed creation from an Idea of 
God to an IDEAL the EGO wants; a world IT rules, made up of bod¬ 
ies, mindless, and capable of COMPLETE corruption and decay. 



648 Romans 6:23 For the wages of sin is death; but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 



651 


1-641 



Volume I Text 


T 19 c 7. 
If this is a MISTAKE, it can be undone easily by truth. 
ANY 
mistake can be corrected, if TRUTH be left to judge it. 
But, if the 
mistake is given the STATUS of truth, to what CAN it be brought? 
The "holiness" of sin is kept in place by just this strange device. 
As 
TRUTH, it IS inviolate, and everything is brought to IT for judg¬ 
ment. 
As a MISTAKE, IT must be brought to truth. 
It is impossible 
to have faith in sin, for sin IS faithlessness. 
But it IS possible to have 
faith that a MISTAKE can be corrected. 
T(70l) -525 
T 19 c 8. 
There is no stone in all the ego's embattled citadel more 
heavily defended than the idea that sin is real; the NATURAL ex¬ 
pression of what the Son of God has MADE himself to be, AND 
WHAT HE IS. 
To the ego, THIS IS NO MISTAKE. 
For this IS its real¬ 
ity; this is the "truth," from which escape will ALWAYS be impossi¬ 
ble. 
This is his past, his present, and his future. 
For he has somehow 
managed to corrupt his Father, and change His Mind COM¬ 
PLETELY. 
Mourn then the death of God, Whom sin has killed! 

T 19 C 9. 
And this WOULD be the ego's wish, which, in its madness, 
it thinks it has ACCOMPLISHED. 
Would you not RATHER that all 
this be nothing more than a MISTAKE, ENTIRELY correctable, and 
so easily escaped from that its whole correction is like walking 
through a mist into the sun? For that is all it IS. 
Perhaps you would 
be tempted to AGREE with the ego, that it is far better to be sinful 
than mistaken. 
But think you carefully before you allow yourself to 
make this choice. 
Approach it not lightly, for it IS the choice of hell 
or Heaven. 
T(702) -526 

T 19 D. 
The Unreality of Sin (Notes 1530 10:90) 

T 19 D 1 . 
The 649 attraction of guilt is found in sin, NOT error. 
Sin will 
be repeated, BECAUSE of this attraction. 
Fear can become so acute 
that the sin is denied the acting out, but, while the guilt REMAINS 
attractive, the mind will suffer, and not let go the IDEA of the sin. 

For guilt still calls to it, and the mind hears it and yearns for it, mak¬ 
ing it a willing captive to its sick appeal. 
Sin is an idea of evil that 


649 Feb. 
27, 1976 


1-642 


652 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


can not BE corrected, and will be forever DESIRABLE. 
As an ES¬ 
SENTIAL part of what the ego thinks you ARE, you will ALWAYS 
want it. 
And only an AVENGER, with a mind UNLIKE your own, 
could stamp it out through FEAR. 


T 19 D 2. 
The ego does not think it possible that love, NOT fear, is 
really called upon by sin, AND ALWAYS ANSWERS. 
For the ego 
brings sin to FEAR, demanding punishment. 
But punishment is but 
another form of guilt's protection. 
For what is deserving punish¬ 
ment, must have been REALLY DONE. 
Punishment is always the 
great preserver of sin; treating it with respect, and honoring its 
enormity. 
What must be punished, MUST BE TRUE. 
And what is 
true MUST be eternal, and WILL be repeated endlessly. 
For what 
you think is real YOU WANT, and will NOT let it go. 


T 19 D 3. 
An ERROR, on the other hand, is NOT attractive. 
What you 
see clearly AS A MISTAKE, you WANT corrected. 
Sometimes a sin 
can be repeated over and over, with OBVIOUSLY distressing re¬ 
sults, but WITHOUT the loss of its appeal. 
And suddenly you 
change its status from a sin to a MISTAKE. 
Now you will NOT re¬ 
peat it; you will merely stop, and let it go. 
UNLESS THE GUILT 
REMAINS. 
For then, you will but change the FORM of sin, granting 
that it was an error, but KEEPING IT UNCORRECTABLE. 
This is 
not really a change in your perception, for it is SIN that calls for 
punishment, NOT error. 
T(703) -527 

T 19 D 4. 
The Holy Spirit CANNOT punish sin. 
Mistakes He recog¬ 
nizes, and would correct them all, as God entrusted Him to do. 
But 
SIN He knows not, nor can He RECOGNIZE mistakes that cannot 
be corrected. 
For a mistake that cannot be corrected is MEANING¬ 
LESS to Him. 
Mistakes are FOR correction. 
They call for NOTHING 
ELSE. 
What calls for punishment, must call for NOTHING. 
Yet 
every mistake MUST be a call for love. 
What, then, is sin? What 
COULD it be but a mistake you would keep hidden; a call for help 
that you would keep UNHEARD, and thus UNANSWERED? 

T 19 D 5. 
In time, the Holy Spirit CLEARLY sees the Son of God can 
make mistakes. 
On this, you SHARE His vision. 
Yet you do NOT 


653 


1-643 


Volume I Text 


share His recognition of the difference between time and eternity. 

And when correction is completed, time IS eternity. 
Time is like a 
downward spiral, that seems to travel down from a long, unbroken 
line, along another plane, but which in no way BREAKS the line, or 
interferes with its smooth continuousness. 
Along the spiral, it 
SEEMS as if the line MUST have been broken, but, at the LINE, its 
wholeness is apparent. 


T 19 D 6. 
Everything seen from the spiral is misperceived. 
But, as you 
approach the line, you realize that IT was not affected by the drop 
into another plane at all. 
But, FROM this plane, the LINE seems dis¬ 
continuous. 
And this is but an error in perception, which can be eas¬ 
ily corrected IN THE MIND, although the body's eyes will see no 
change. 
The eyes see many things the mind corrects, and YOU re¬ 
spond, NOT to the eyes' illusions, BUT TO THE MIND's CORREC¬ 
TIONS. 
You SEE the line as broken, and as you shift to different as¬ 
pects of the spiral, the line looks different. 
Yet in your mind is One 
Who KNOWS it is unbroken, and forever changeless. 
T(704) -528 
T 19 D 7. 
This One can teach you how to look on time differently, and 
to see BEYOND it. 
But NOT while you believe in sin. 
In error, yes, 
for this CAN be corrected by the mind. 
But sin is the belief that 
YOUR perception is UNCHANGEABLE, and that the MIND must 
ACCEPT AS TRUE what it is told THROUGH it. 
If it does not obey, 
the MIND is judged insane. 
The ONLY power that could CHANGE 
perception is thus kept impotent, held to the body by the FEAR of 
changed perception, which its Teacher, Who is One with it, would 
bring. 


T 19 D 8. 
When you are tempted to believe that sin is real, remember 
this: If sin is real, both God AND YOU are not. 
If creation is EX¬ 
TENSION, the Creator MUST have extended HIMSELF, and it is 
impossible that what is PART of Him is totally unlike the rest. 
If sin 
is real, God must be at war WITHIN HIMSELF. 
HE must be split, 
and torn between good and evil; partly sane and partially insane. 

For He must have created what wills to destroy Him, and HAS THE 


1-644 


654 


Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


POWER TO DO SO. 
Is it not EASIER to believe that YOU have been 
mistaken, than to believe in this? 

T 19 D 9. 
While you believe that YOUR reality, OR YOUR 
BROTHER'S, is bounded by a body, you will believe in sin. 
While 
you believe that BODIES can unite, you will find guilt attractive, 
and believe that sin is precious. 
For the belief that bodies LIMIT the 
mind leads to a perception of the world in which the PROOF of 
separation seems to be everywhere. 
And God and His creation seem 
to be split apart, and overthrown. 
For sin would PROVE what God 
created holy could not prevail against it, nor remain ITSELF before 
the power of sin. 


T 19 D 10. 
Sin is perceived as mightier than God, before which God 
HIMSELF must bow, and offer His creation to its conqueror. 
Is this 
humility, or madness? If sin were real it would forever be beyond 
the hope of healing. 
T(705) -529 For there would be a power BEYOND 
God's, capable of making another will, which could attack His Will, 
and OVERCOME it. 
And give His Son a will APART from His, and 
STRONGER. 
And each part of His fragmented creation would have 
a DIFFERENT will OPPOSED to His, and in eternal opposition to 
Him AND TO EACH OTHER. 


T 19 D ll. 
Your holy relationship has, as its purpose now, the goal of 
proving THIS is impossible. 
Heaven has smiled upon it, and the be¬ 
lief in sin has been uprooted in its smile of love. 
You SEE it still, be¬ 
cause you do not realize that its FOUNDATION has gone. 
Its 
SOURCE has been removed, and so it can be cherished but a little 
while, before it vanishes. 
Only the habit of LOOKING for it still re¬ 
mains. 
And yet you look with Heaven's smile upon YOUR lips, and 
Heaven's blessing on your sight. 


T 19 D 12. 
You will NOT see it long. 
For, in the NEW perception, the 
mind CORRECTS it when it SEEMS to be seen, and it becomes in¬ 
visible. 
But ERRORS are quickly recognized, and quickly given to 
correction, to be healed, NOT hidden. 
YOU will be healed of sin and 
all its ravages, the INSTANT that you give it no power over EACH 
OTHER. 
And you will HELP each other overcome MISTAKES, by 


655 


1-645 


Volume I Text 


joyously RELEASING one another from the belief in sin. 
In the holy 
instant, you will see the smile of Heaven shining on BOTH of you. 

And you will shine upon each other, in glad acknowledgment of the 
grace that has been GIVEN you. 


T 19 D 13. 
For sin will NOT prevail against a union Heaven has 
smiled upon. 
Your perception was HEALED in the holy instant 
Heaven gave you. 
Forget what you HAVE seen, and raise your eyes, 
in faith, to what you now CAN see. 
The barriers to Heaven will dis¬ 
appear before your holy sight. 
For you who were sightless have 
been GIVEN vision, and you CAN see. 
Look not for what has been 
REMOVED, but for the glory that has been RESTORED, for you to 
see. 
T(706) - 530 - 650 Look upon your Redeemer, and behold what He 
would show you in each other. 
And let not sin arise again, to blind 
your eyes. 
For sin would keep you separate, but your Redeemer 
would have you look upon each other as yourself. 
651 
T 19 D 14. 
Your relationship is now a temple of healing, a place where 
all the weary ones can come and find rest. 
652 Here is the rest that 
waits for all, after the journey. 
And it is brought NEARER to all, by 
your relationship. 
As this peace expands, from deep inside your¬ 
selves, to embrace ALL the Sonship and give it rest, it will encounter 
many obstacles. 
Some of them, YOU will try to impose. 
Others will 
seem to arise from elsewhere; from your brothers, and from various 
aspects of the world OUTSIDE. 
But peace will gently cover them, 
extending past, COMPLETELY unhindered. 


T 19 D 15. 
The extension of the Holy Spirit's purpose, from YOUR re¬ 
lationship to others, to bring them gently IN, has already begun. 


This is the way in which He will bring means and goal in line. 
The 
peace He laid, deep within BOTH of you, will quietly extend to 
EVERY aspect of your lives, surrounding both of you with glowing 


650 February 28, 1967. 


651 Mark 12:29-31 “The second is this. 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
There is none other 
commandment greater than these.” Also Matthew 22:39 

Leviticus 19:18 You shall not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the children of your people, 
but you shall love your neighbor as yourself: I am the LORD. 


652 Matthew 11:28 “Come to Me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 


1-646 


656 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


happiness, and the calm awareness of COMPLETE protection. 
And 
you will carry its message of love and safety and freedom to every¬ 
one who draws nigh unto your temple, where healing waits for him. 


T 19 D 16. 
You will NOT wait to give him this. 
For you will CALL to 
him and he will answer, RECOGNIZING in your call the call of 
God. 
And you will draw him in and give him rest, as it was given 
YOU. 
All this will you do. 
But the peace that already lies deeply 
within, must first expand and FLOW ACROSS the obstacles YOU 
place before it. 
THIS IT WILL DO. 
For nothing undertaken WITH 
the Holy Spirit, remains unfinished. 
You can indeed be sure of 

NOTHING you see OUTSIDE you, but of this you CAN be sure. 

T(707) - 531 - 

T 19 D 17. 
The Holy Spirit asks that you offer Him a resting-place, 
where YOU will rest in Him. 
He answered you, and entered your 
relationship. 
Would you not now RETURN His graciousness, and 
enter into a relationship with Him? For it is HE Who offered YOUR 
relationship the gift of holiness, without which it would have been 
forever impossible to appreciate each other. 
The gratitude you owe 
to Him, He asks but that YOU receive, FOR Him. 
And, when you 
look with gentle graciousness upon each other, you ARE beholding 
Him. 
For you are looking where He IS, and NOT apart from you. 


T 19 D 18. 
You CANNOT see the Holy Spirit, but you CAN see your 
brothers truly. 
And the light in them will show you all that you 
NEED to see. 
When the peace in you has been extended to encom¬ 
pass EVERYONE, the Holy Spirit's function here will be accom¬ 
plished. 
What NEED is there for SEEING, then? When God has 
taken the last step Himself, the Holy Spirit will gather ALL your 
thanks and gratitude that you have offered Him, and lay them gen¬ 
tly before His Creator, in the Name of His most holy Son. 
And the 
Father will ACCEPT them, in HIS Name. 
What need is there of see¬ 
ing, in the presence of HIS gratitude? T(708) -532 653 


March 1, 1967 


657 


1-647 



Volume I Text 

T 19 E. 
Obstacles to Peace -I. 
The Desire to Get Rid of It 
(Notes 1542 10:102) 

T 19 E l. 
The first obstacle that peace must flow across is YOUR de¬ 
sire to get RID of it. 
For it cannot extend, UNLESS you keep it. 
YOU 
are the center from which it radiates outward, to call the others IN. 

You are its home; its tranquil dwelling-place, from which it gently 
reaches out, but NEVER leaving YOU. 
If YOU would make it home¬ 
less, how can it abide within the Son of God? If it would spread 
across the whole creation, it MUST begin with you. 
And, FROM 
you, reach to everyone who calls, and bring him rest by JOINING 
you. 


T 19 E 2. 
Why would you want peace homeless? What do you think 
that it must DISPOSSESS, to dwell in you? What SEEMS to be the 
cost you are so unwilling to pay? The little barriers of sand still 
stand between you. 
Would you reinforce them NOW? You are NOT 
asked to let them go for yourselves alone. 
Christ asks it of you, for 
FFIMSELF. 
Fie would bring peace to everyone. 
And how can Fie do 
this, EXCEPT through you? Would you let a little bank of sand, a 
wall of dust, a tiny seeming barrier stand between your brothers 
and salvation? 

T 19 E 3. 
And yet it IS this little remnant of attack you cherish still 
against each other, that is the first obstacle the peace in you encoun¬ 
ters, in its going forth. 
This little wall of hatred would STILL oppose 
the Will of God, and keep It limited. 
The FFoly Spirit's purpose rests 
in peace within you. 
Yet you are STILL unwilling to let it JOIN you 
wholly. 
You still oppose the Will of God, just by a little. 
But that lit¬ 
tle IS a limit you would place upon the whole. 
God's Will is One, 
NOT many. 
It FFAS no opposition, for there is none BESIDE It. 


T 19 E 4. 
What you would still contain behind your little barrier, and 
keep SEPARATE from each other, is mightier than the universe. 
For 
it would FFOLD BACK the universe AND ITS CREATOR. 
This little 
wall would hide the purpose T(709) -533 of FFeaven, and keep it 
FROM FFeaven. 
Would you thrust salvation AWAY from the GIVER 
of salvation? For such have YOU become. 
Peace could no more DE¬ 


I-648 


658 


Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


PART from you than from God. 
Fear not this little obstacle. 
It can 
NOT contain the Will of God. 
Peace WILL flow across it, and join 
you WITHOUT hindrance. 


T 19 E 5. 
Salvation cannot BE withheld from you. 
It IS your purpose. 

You CANNOT will APART from this. 
You HAVE no purpose apart 
from each other, nor apart from the one you asked the Holy Spirit to 
SHARE with you. 
The little wall will fall away so quietly, beneath 
the wings of peace! For it will send its messengers from you to all 
the world. 
And barriers will fall away before their coming, as easily 
as those which YOU would interpose will be surmounted. 
To over¬ 
come the world is no more difficult than to surmount your little 
wall. 
For in the miracle of YOUR relationship, WITHOUT this bar¬ 
rier, is EVERY miracle contained. 


T 19 E 6. 
There is no order of difficulty in miracles, for they ARE all 
the same. 
Each is a gentle WINNING OVER, from the appeal of 
guilt to the appeal of love. 
How can this FAIL to be accomplished, 
WHEREVER it is undertaken? Guilt can raise no REAL barriers 
against it. 
And all that seems to stand between you MUST fall away, 
because of the appeal YOU answered. 
And from you who answered. 

He Who answered you would call. 
His home is in your holy rela¬ 
tionship. 
Do not attempt to stand BETWEEN Him and His holy 
purpose, for it IS yours. 
But let Him quietly EXTEND the miracle of 
your relationship to everyone CONTAINED in it, as it was given. 


T 19 E 7. 
There is a hush in Heaven, a happy expectancy, a little pause 
of gladness, in acknowledgment of the journey's end. 
For Heaven 
knows you well, as you know Heaven. 
No illusions stand between 
you. 
Look not upon the little T(710) -534 wall of shadows. 
The sun has 
risen OVER it. 
How can a shadow KEEP you from the sun? No more 
can YOU be kept by shadows from the light in which illusions end. 

EVERY miracle is but the end of an illusion. 
Such was the journey; 
such its ending. 
And in the goal of truth, which YOU ACCEPTED, 
must ALL illusions end. 


T 19 E 8. 
The little, insane wish to get rid of Him Whom you invited 
IN, and push Him OUT, MUST produce conflict. 
As you look upon 


659 


1-649 


Volume I Text 


the world, this little wish, uprooted and floating aimlessly, can land 
and settle briefly upon ANYTHING. 
For it HAS no purpose now. 

BEFORE the Holy Spirit entered to abide with you, it SEEMED to 
have a MIGHTY purpose; the fixed and unchangeable dedication to 
sin and its results. 
Now it is aimless, wandering pointlessly, causing 
no more than tiny interruptions in love's appeal. 


T 19 E 9. 
This feather of a wish, this tiny illusion, this microscopic 
remnant of the belief in sin, is all that remains of what once 
SEEMED to be the world. 
It is no longer an unrelenting barrier to 
peace. 
Its pointless wandering makes its results APPEAR to be more 
erratic and unpredictable than before. 
Yet what COULD be more 
unstable than a tightly-organized delusional system? Its SEEMING 
stability is its pervasive WEAKNESS, which extends to EVERY¬ 
THING. 
The VARIABILITY which the little remnant induces, 
merely indicates its LIMITED results. 


T 19 E 10. 
How mighty can a little feather be, before the great wings of 
truth? Can it oppose an eagle's flight, or hinder the advance of 
summer? Can it interfere with the EFFECTS of summer's sun upon a 
garden covered by the snow? See but how easily this little wisp 654 is 
lifted up and carried away, never to return. 
And part with it in 
gladness, not regret. 
For it is nothing in itself, and STOOD FOR 
nothing when you had greater faith in its protection. 
Would you not 
rather greet the summer sun, than fix your gaze upon a disappear¬ 
ing snowflake, and shiver in remembrance of the winter's cold? 

T(711) -535 655 

T 19 F. 
The Attraction of Guilt (Notes 1548 10:108) 

T 19 F l. 
The attraction of guilt produces fear of love. 
For love would 
NEVER look on guilt at all. 
It is the NATURE of love to look upon 
ONLY the truth, for there it sees itself, with which it would unite in 
holy union and completion. 
As love must look past fear, so must 


654 Urtext manuscript has it typed “whisp,” this is an apparent typo since the word intended would 
appear to be “wisp.” 

655 March 3, 1967 


1-650 


660 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


fear see love not. 
For love contains the END of guilt, as surely as fear 
DEPENDS on it. 
Love is attracted ONLY to love. 
Overlooking guilt 
completely, IT SEES NO FEAR. 
Being wholly without attack, it 
COULD not be afraid. 


T 19 F 2. 
Fear is attracted to what love sees NOT. 
And each believes 
that what the other looks upon does not exist. 
Fear looks on guilt 
with just the same devotion that love looks on itself. 
And each has 
messengers which they send forth, and which return to them with 
messages written in the language in which their going forth was 
asked. 
Love's messengers are gently sent, and return with messages 
of love and gentleness. 
The messengers of fear are harshly ordered 
to seek out guilt, and cherish every scrap of evil and sin that they 
can find, losing none of them on pain of death, and laying them re¬ 
spectfully before their lord and master. 


T 19 F 3. 
Perception cannot obey two masters, each asking for mes¬ 
sages of different things, in different languages. 
656 What fear would 
feed upon, love overlooks. 
What fear DEMANDS, love cannot even 
SEE. 
The fierce attraction that guilt holds for fear, is wholly absent 
from love's gentle perception. 
What love would look upon is mean¬ 
ingless to fear, and quite invisible. 
Relationships in this world are 
the result of how the world is seen. 
And this depends on which 
emotion was called on to send its messengers to look upon it, and 
return with word of what they saw. 


T 19 F 4. 
Fear's messengers are trained through terror, and they trem¬ 
ble when T(712) -536 their master calls upon them to serve him. 
For 
fear is merciless even to its friends. 
Its messengers steal guiltily 
away in hungry search of guilt, for they are kept cold and starving, 
and made very vicious by their master, who allows them to feast 
only upon what they return to him. 
No little shred of guilt escapes 
their hungry eyes. 
And in their savage search for sin, they pounce 

656 Matthew 6:24 “No one can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or 
else he will be loyal to the one and despise the other. 
You cannot serve God and mammon.” 


661 


1-651 



Volume I Text 


on any living thing they see, and carry it screaming to their master, 
to be devoured. 


T 19 F 5. 
Send not these savage messengers into the world, to feast 
upon it, and to prey upon reality. 
For they will bring you word of 
bones and skin and flesh. 
They have been taught to seek for the cor¬ 
ruptible, and to return with gorges filled with things decayed and 
rotted. 
To them, such things are beautiful, because they seem to al¬ 
lay their savage pangs of hunger. 
For they are frantic with the pain 
of fear, and would avert the punishment of him who sends them 
forth, by offering him what TFiEY hold dear. 


T 19 F 6. 
The Ffoly Spirit has given you love's messengers, to send 
INSTEAD of those YOU trained through fear. 
TFiEY are as eager to 
return to you what they hold dear, as are the others. 
If you send 
TFiEM forth, they will see only the blameless and the beautiful, the 
gentle and the kind. 
They will be as careful to let no little act of char¬ 
ity, no tiny expression of forgiveness, no little breaths 657 of love, es¬ 
cape their notice. 
And they will return, with all the happy things 
they found, to share them lovingly with you. 
Be not AFRAID of 
them. 
They offer you salvation. 
Theirs are the messages of SAFETY. 

For TF1EY see the world as kind. 


T 19 F 7. 
If you send forth ONLY the messengers the Floly Spirit gave 
you, WANTING no messages but theirs, you will see fear no more. 

The world will be transformed before your sight, cleansed of all 
guilt, and softly brushed with beauty. 
The world contains no fear 
that YOU laid not upon it. 
T(713) -537 And none you cannot ask love's 
messengers to REMOVE from it, and see it still. 
The Floly Spirit has 
given you H IS messengers, to send each other, and return to each 
with what love sees. 
They have been given to REPLACE the hungry 
dogs of fear you sent instead. 
And they go forth to signify the END 
of fear. 



657 The Urtext manuscript says “breathe” which is a verb, and a noun is needed here, so we have some 
sort of copying mistake. 
The Notes says “breaths” so this has been changed to reflect the original 
reading. 



1-652 


662 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


T 19 F 8. 
Love, too, would set a feast before you, on a table covered 
with a spotless cloth, set in a quiet garden, where no sound but sing¬ 
ing and a softly joyous whispering is ever heard. 
This is a feast 
which honors your holy relationship, and at which everyone is wel¬ 
comed as an honored guest. 
And in a holy instant grace is said by 
everyone together, as they join in gentleness before the table of 
communion. 
658 And I will join you there, as long ago I promised, 
and promise still. 
For in your new relationship am I made welcome, 
and where I am made welcome, 659 there I AM. 
T(714) -538 660 

T 19 F 9.1 am made welcome in the state of grace, which means YOU 
HAVE AT LAST FORGIVEN ME. 
For I became the symbol of your 
sin, and so I had to die INSTEAD of you. 
To the ego, sin MEANS 
death, and so Atonement IS ACHIEVED THROUGH MURDER. 
Sal¬ 
vation is looked upon as a way by which the Son of God was killed, 
instead of YOU. 
Yet would I offer you my BODY, you whom I love, 
KNOWING its littleness? Or would I teach that bodies cannot keep 
us apart? Mine was of no greater value than yours; no better means 
for the COMMUNICATION of salvation, but NOT its Source. 


T 19 F 10. 
No one can die for anyone, and death does not atone for 
sin. 
661 But you can LIVE to show it is not REAL. 
The body DOES ap¬ 
pear to be the symbol of sin, while you believe that it can get you 
what you want. 
While you believe that it can give you pleasure, you 
will ALSO believe that it can bring you pain. 
To think you could be 


658 Matthew 26:29 “But I say to you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until that day 
when I drink it new with you in My Father’s kingdom.” 

Luke 22:30 “That you may eat and drink at My table in My kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel.” 

659 Matthew 18:20 “For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst 
of them.” 

660 March 6, 1967 

661 In this one sentence Jesus challenges both the traditional Jewish sacrificial cult whereby the 
slaughter of the “scapegoat” or sacrificial animal was believed to expiate the sin of the community, 
along with one early Jewish interpretation of the crucifixion, in which Jesus’ execution was seen as a 
kind of human sacrifice to atone for the sins of the world. 
This particular form of “blood and suffering” 
Christology whereby God punished His Son for our errors has, like the earlier animal sacrifice cultus 
with which it shares the same atavistic bloody-mindedness and body fetishes, is frequently described in 
ACIM as an error, this being just one example. 
The next sentence points to a common thread in 
ACIM’s treatment of this issue, it’s not the dying but the living that matters, not the crucifixion that 
contains power but rather the resurrection. 



663 


1-653 



Volume I Text 


satisfied and happy with so little, IS to hurt yourself. 
And to LIMIT 
the happiness that you would have, CALLS upon pain to fill your 
meager store, and make your lives complete. 
This IS completion, as 
the ego sees it. 
For guilt creeps in where happiness has been re¬ 
moved, and SUBSTITUTES for it. 


T 19 F 11. 
Communion is another kind of completion, which goes be¬ 
yond guilt BECAUSE it goes beyond the body. 
Communion comes 
with peace, and peace MUST transcend the body. 


T 19 G. 
Obstacles to Peace - II. 
The Belief the Body is 
Valuable for What it Offers (Not present in Notes) 

T 19 G l. 
We said that peace must first surmount the obstacle of your 
desire to get rid of it. 
Where the attraction of guilt holds sway, peace 
is NOT WANTED. 
The second obstacle that peace must flow across, 
and closely related to the first, is the belief that the body is valuable 
FOR WHAT IT OFFERS. 
For here is the attraction of guilt MADE 
MANIFEST in the body, and SEEN in it. 
T(715) -539 

T 19 G 2. 
THIS is the value that you think peace would ROB you of. 

This is what you believe that it would dispossess, and leave YOU 
homeless. 
And it is this for which YOU would deny a home to 
peace. 
This "sacrifice" you feel to be too great to make, too much to 
ask of you. 
Is it a SACRIFICE, or a RELEASE? What has the body 
REALLY given you, that justifies your strange belief that in it lies 
salvation? Do you not see that this is the belief in DEATH? Here is 
the focus of the perception of Atonement as murder. 
Here is the 
SOURCE of the idea that love is fear. 


T 19 G 3. 
The Holy Spirit's messengers are sent far beyond the body, 
calling the mind to join in holy communion, and be at peace. 
Such is 
the message that I gave them, for YOU. 
It is only the messengers of 
FEAR that see the body, for they look for what can suffer. 
Is it a sac¬ 
rifice to be REMOVED from what can suffer? The Holy Spirit does 
not DEMAND you "sacrifice" the hope of the body's pleasures. 
It 
HAS no hope of pleasure. 
But neither can it bring you fear of pain. 



1-654 


664 


Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


Pain is the ONLY "sacrifice" the Holy Spirit asks. 
And this He 
WOULD remove. 


T 19 G 4. 
Peace is extended from you only to the eternal. 
And it 
reaches out FROM the eternal in YOU. 
It flows across all else. 
The 
second obstacle is no more solid than the first. 
For you will neither 
to get rid of peace, nor to LIMIT it. 
What are these obstacles that you 
would interpose between peace and its going forth, but barriers you 
place between your will and its accomplishment? You WANT com¬ 
munion, NOT the feast of fear. 
You WANT salvation, NOT the pain 
of guilt. 
AND YOU WANT YOUR FATHER, NOT a little mound of 
clay, to be your home. 


T 19 G 5. 
In your holy relationship is your Father's Son. 
He has NOT 
lost communion with Him. 
NOR WITH HIMSELF. 
When you 
agreed to join each other, you acknowledged this is so. 
This has NO 
cost. 
But it HAS release from cost. 
You have paid very dearly for 
your illusions. 
And NOTHING you have paid for brought you 
peace. 
Are you not GLAD that Heaven can not BE sacrificed? T(716) - 
540 And sacrifice can not BE asked of you? There IS no obstacle that 
you can place before our union, for in your holy relationship I am 
there ALREADY. 
We will surmount all obstacles TOGETHER, for 
we stand WITHIN the gates, and not outside. 


T 19 G 6. 
How easily the gates are opened from within, to let peace 
through to bless the tired world! Can it be difficult for us to walk 
past barriers together, when you have JOINED the Limitless? The 
end of guilt is in your hands, to give. 
Would you stop now, to 
LOOK for guilt in each other? Let me be to you the symbol of the 
END of guilt, and look upon each other, as you would look on me. 

Forgive me for all the sins you think the Son of God committed. 
And 
in the light of your forgiveness, he will remember who he is, and 
forget what never was. 


T 19 G 7. 
1 ask for your forgiveness, for if YOU are guilty, so must I 
be. 
And if I surmounted guilt and overcame the world, you were 


665 


1-655 


Volume I Text 


WITH me. 
662 Would you see in me the symbol of guilt, or of the 
END of guilt? Remembering that what I signify to you, you see 
within YOURSELF? From your holy relationship. 
Truth proclaims 
the truth, and Love looks on itself. 
Salvation flows from deep within 
the home you offered to my Father and to me. 
And we are there to¬ 
gether, in the quiet communion in which the Father and the Son are 
joined. 


T 19 G 8. 
Oh come ye faithful, to the holy union of the Father and Son 
in YOU. 
And keep YOU not apart from what is offered you, in grati¬ 
tude for giving peace its home in Heaven. 
Send forth to all the 
world the joyous message of the end of guilt, and all the world will 
answer. 
Think of your happiness, as everyone offers you witness of 
the end of sin, and shows you that its power is gone forever. 
Where 
can guilt be, when the belief in sin is gone? And where is death, 663 
when its great advocate is heard no more? T(717) -541 
T 19 G 9. 
Forgive me your illusions, and release me from punishment 
for what I have NOT done. 
So will YOU learn the freedom that I 
taught, by teaching freedom to each other, and so releasing me. 
I am 
within your holy relationship, yet you would imprison me behind 
the obstacles you RAISE to freedom, and bar my way to YOU. 
Yet it 
is not possible to keep AWAY One Who is there ALREADY. 
And IN 
Him, it IS possible that our communion, where we are ALREADY 
joined, will be the focus of the new perception that will bring light to 
all the world, contained in YOU. 


T 19 H. 
Pleasure and Pain (Not present in Notes) 

T 19 H l. 
Your little part is but to give the Holy Spirit the whole IDEA 
of sacrifice. 
And to ACCEPT the peace He gave, instead. 
WITHOUT 
the limits that would hold its extension back, and so would limit 


662 John 16:33 “These things I have spoken to you, that in Me you may have peace. 
In the world you 
will have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.” 

663 1 Corinthians 15:53-57 For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on 
immortality. 
But when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on 
immortality, then shall come to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. 
O 
death, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy sting? The sting of death is sin; and the power of sin 
is the law: but thanks be to God, who giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 



1-656 


666 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


YOUR awareness of it. 
For what He gives MUST be extended, if 
YOU would have its limitless power, and use it for the Son of God's 
release. 
It is not THIS you would be rid of, and having it, you 
CANNOT limit it. 
If peace is homeless, so are you. 
And so am I. 


And He Who IS our Home, is homeless WITH us. 


T 19 H 2. 
Is this your will? Would you forever be a wanderer in search 
of peace? Would you invest your hope of peace and happiness in 
what MUST fail? Faith in the eternal is ALWAYS justified, for the 
eternal is forever kind, infinite in its patience, and wholly loving. 
It 
will accept you wholly, and give you peace. 
But it can unite only 
with what ALREADY is at peace in you, immortal as itself. 
The 
body can bring you neither peace nor turmoil; not pain nor joy. 
It is 
a means, and NOT an end. 
It HAS no purpose of itself, but only 
what is GIVEN it to do. 
The body will seem to BE whatever is the 
means for reaching the goal that you ASSIGN to it. 


T 19 H 3. 
Only the mind can set a purpose, and only mind can see the 
means for its accomplishment, and justify its use. 
Peace and guilt are 
both conditions of the mind, to be ATTAINED. 
And these condi¬ 
tions are the home of the emotion that called them forth, and there¬ 
fore is COMPATIBLE with it. 
But think you T(718) -542 which it is that 
is compatible with YOU. 
Here is your choice, and it IS free. 
But all 
that LIES in it WILL come with it. 
And what you think you are can 
NEVER be APART from it. 


T 19 H 4. 
The body is the great SEEMING betrayer of faith. 
In it lies 
disillusionment and the seeds of faithlessness. 
But ONLY if you 
asked of it what it CANNOT give. 
Can YOUR mistake be reasonable 
grounds for your depression and disillusionment, and for retaliative 
attack on what you think has failed you? Use not your ERROR as 
the justification for your faithlessness. 
You have NOT sinned, but 
you HAVE been mistaken in what is faithful. 
And the correction of 
YOUR mistake will GIVE you grounds for faith. 
T(719) -543 664 


664 March 9, 1967 


667 


1-657 



Volume I Text 


T 19 H 5. 
It is impossible to seek for pleasure through the body, and 
NOT find pain. 
It is essential that this relationship be understood, 
for it is one the ego sees as proof of sin. 
It is not REALLY punitive at 
all. 
It is but the inevitable result of equating yourself WITH the 
body, which is the INVITATION to pain. 
For it invites FEAR to en¬ 
ter, and become your PURPOSE. 
The attraction of guilt MUST enter 
with it, and WHATEVER fear directs the body to do IS therefore 
painful. 
It will share the pain of ALL illusions, and the illusion of 
pleasure will BE the same as pain. 


T 19 H 6. 
Is not this inevitable? Under fear's orders, the body WILL 
pursue guilt, serving its master, whose attraction to guilt maintains 
the whole illusion of his existence. 
This, then, IS the attraction to 
PAIN. 
Ruled by THIS perception, the body becomes the servant of 
pain, seeking it dutifully, and obeying the idea that pain IS pleasure. 

It is this IDEA that underlies all of the ego's heavy investment in the 
body. 
And it is this insane relationship which it keeps hidden, and 
yet feeds upon. 
To YOU, it teaches that the body's pleasure is hap¬ 
piness. 
But to ITSELF it whispers, "It is death." 

T 19 H 7. 
Why should the body be ANYTHING to you? Certainly 
what it is MADE of is not precious. 
And, just as certainly, IT has no 
feeling. 
It transmits TO YOU the feelings that you WANT. 
Like any 
communication medium, the body receives and sends the messages 
that it is given. 
It has NO feeling for them. 
All of the feeling with 
which they are invested is given by the sender and the receiver. 
The 
ego and the Holy Spirit both recognize this. 
And both also recognize 
that here, THE SENDER AND RECEIVER ARE THE SAME. 
The 
Holy Spirit TELLS you this with joy. 
The ego HIDES it, for it would 
keep you unaware of it. 


T 19 H 8. 
Who would send messages of hatred and attack, if he but 
understood he sends them to HIMSELF? Who would accuse, make 
guilty and condemn HIMSELF? T(720) -544 The ego's messages are 
ALWAYS sent AWAY from you, in the belief that, for your message 
of attack and guilt, will someone OTHER than yourself suffer. 
And, 
even if YOU suffer, yet someone ELSE will suffer more. 
The great 


1-658 


668 


Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


deceiver recognizes that this is not so, but, as the "enemy" of peace, 
it urges you to SEND OUT all your messages of hate, and free 
YOURSELF. 
And, to convince you this is possible, it bids the body 
search for pain in attack upon another, calling it pleasure, and OF¬ 
FERING it to you as freedom FROM attack. 


T 19 H 9. 
Hear not its madness, and believe not the impossible is true. 

Forget not that the ego has DEDICATED the body to the goal of sin, 
and places in it ALL its faith that this can be accomplished. 
Its sad 
disciples chant the body's praise continually, in solemn celebration 
of the ego's rule. 
Not one but MUST believe that YIELDING to the 
attraction of guilt is the ESCAPE from pain. 
Not one but MUST re¬ 
gard the body as himself, WITHOUT which he would die, and yet 
WITHIN which is his death equally inevitable. 


T 19 H10. 
It is not given to the ego's disciples to realize that they have 
dedicated themselves to death. 
This has been OFFERED them, but 
they have not accepted it. 
And what is offered must also be re¬ 
ceived, to be truly given. 
For the Holy Spirit, too, is a communica¬ 
tion medium, receiving from the Father, and offering His messages 
unto the Son. 
Like to the ego, the Holy Spirit is both the sender and 
receiver. 
For what is sent through Him RETURNS to Him, seeking 
itself along the way, and FINDING what it seeks. 
So does the ego 
FIND the death it seeks, returning it to YOU. 
T(72l) -545 665 

T 19 I. 
Obstacles to Peace - III. 
The Attraction of Death (Not 
present in Notes ) 

T 19 11 . 
To you, into whose special relationship the Holy Spirit en¬ 
tered, it IS given to release and be released from the dedication to 
death. 
For it was offered you, and you ACCEPTED. 
But you must 
learn still more about this strange devotion, for it contains the third 
of the obstacles that peace must flow across. 
No-one can die, unless 
he chooses death. 
What seems to be the FEAR of death, is really its 
ATTRACTION. 
Guilt, too, is feared and fearful. 
Yet it could have no 
hold at all, except on those who are attracted to it, and seek it out. 
So 


March 10, 1967 


669 


1-659 



Volume I Text 


it is with death. 
Made by the ego, its dark shadow falls across all 
living things, because the ego is the "enemy" of life. 


T 19 12 . 
And yet, a shadow cannot kill. 
What is a shadow to the liv¬ 
ing? They but walk past, and it is gone. 
But what of those whose 
dedication it is NOT to live? The black-draped "sinners," the ego's 
mournful chorus, plodding so heavily AWAY from life, dragging 
their chains and marching in the slow procession that honors their 
grim master, lord of death. 
Touch any one of them with the gentle 
hand of forgiveness, and watch the chains fall away, along with 
YOURS. 
See him throw aside the black robe he was wearing to his 
funeral, and hear him laugh at death. 
The sentence sin would lay 
upon him, he can escape with your forgiveness. 


T 1913. 
This is NOT arrogance. 
It is the Will of God. 
What is impos¬ 
sible to you who choose His Will as yours? What is death to you? 
Your dedication is NOT to death, nor to its master. 
When you ac¬ 
cepted the Holy Spirit's purpose in place of the ego's, you RE¬ 
NOUNCED death, exchanging it for life. 
We know that the RESULT 
of an idea leaves not its source. 
And death is the result of the 
thought we call the ego, as surely as life is the result of the Thought 
of God. 


T 19 J. 
The Incorruptible Body (Not present in Notes) 

T 19 J 1 . 
From the ego came sin and guilt and death, in OPPOSITION 
to life and innocence, and to the Will of God Himself. 
Where can 
such opposition lie, but in the sick minds of the insane, dedicated to 
madness, and set AGAINST the peace of Heaven? T(722) -546 

T 19 J 2. 
One thing is sure; God, Who created neither sin nor death, 
wills not that you be bound by them. 
He knows of neither sin NOR 
its result. 
The shrouded figures in the funeral procession march not 
in honor of their Creator, Whose Will it is they LIVE. 
They are not 
FOLLOWING it; they are OPPOSING it. 
And what is the black- 
draped body they would bury? A body THEY dedicated to death, a 
symbol of corruption, a sacrifice to sin, OFFERED to sin to feed 
upon, and keep ITSELF alive. 
A thing condemned, damned by its 


1-660 


670 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


maker, and lamented by every mourner who looks upon it as him¬ 
self. 


T 19 J 3. 
You who believe you have condemned the Son of God to this 
ARE arrogant. 
But you who would RELEASE him are but honoring 
the Will of his Creator. 
The arrogance of sin, the pride of guilt, the 
sepulchre of separation, all are part of your unrecognized dedication 
to death. 
The glitter of guilt you laid upon the body would KILL it. 

For what the ego loves, it kills for its obedience. 
But what obeys it 
not, it CANNOT kill. 
You have ANOTHER dedication which would 
keep the body incorruptible and perfect, as long as it is useful for 
your holy purpose. 


T 19 J 4. 
The body no more dies than it can feel. 
IT DOES NOTHING. 

Of itself, it is neither corruptible nor incorruptible. 
IT IS NOTHING. 

It is the result of a tiny, mad IDEA of corruption, WHICH CAN BE 
CORRECTED. 
For God has ANSWERED this insane idea with His 
Own, an Answer which left Him not, and therefore brings the Crea¬ 
tor to the awareness of every mind which heard His Answer, and 
ACCEPTED it. 
You who are dedicated to the incorruptible, have 
been given, through YOUR acceptance, the power to RELEASE from 
corruption. 
What better way to teach the first and fundamental 
principle in a course on miracles than by showing you the one that 
SEEMS to be the hardest can be accomplished FIRST? T(723) -547 

T 19 J 5. 
The body can but serve your purpose. 
As you look upon it, 
so will it seem to be. 
Death, were it true, would be the final and 
complete disruption of communication, which IS the ego's goal. 

Those who fear death see not how often and how loudly they CALL 
to it, and bid it come to SAVE them from communication. 
For death 
is seen as SAFETY, the great dark savior from the light of truth, the 
answer to the Answer, the silencer of the Voice that speaks for God. 

Yet the retreat to death is NOT the end of conflict. 
Only God's AN¬ 
SWER is its end. 


T 19 J 6. 
The obstacle of your seeming love for death, which peace 
must flow across, SEEMS to be very great. 
For in it lies hidden all 
the ego's secrets, all its strange devices for deception, all its sick 


671 


1-661 


Volume I Text 


ideas and weird imaginings. 
Here is the final end of union, the tri¬ 
umph of the ego's making over creation, the victory of lifelessness 
on life Itself. 
Under the dusty edge of its distorted world, the ego 
would lay the Son of God, slain by its orders, proof in his decay that 
God Himself is powerless before the ego's might, unable to protect 
the life that He created, against the ego's savage wish to kill. 


T 19 J 7. 
My brothers, children of our Father, this is a DREAM of 
death. 
There is no funeral, no dark altars, no grim commandments, 
nor twisted rituals of condemnation, to which the BODY leads you. 

Ask not release of IT. 
But FREE it from the merciless and unrelent¬ 
ing orders you laid upon it, and forgive it what you ordered it to do. 

In its exaltation, you COMMANDED it to die, for only death 
COULD conquer life. 
And what but insanity could look upon the 
defeat of God, and think it REAL? T(724) -548 
T 19 J 8. 
The fear of death will go as its appeal is yielded to love's 
REAL attraction. 
The end of sin, which nestles quietly in the safety 
of your relationship, protected by your union, ready to grow into a 
mighty force for God, is very near. 
The infancy of salvation is care¬ 
fully guarded by love, preserved from every thought that would 
attack it, and quietly made ready to fulfill the mighty task for which 
it was GIVEN you. 
Your new-born purpose is nursed by angels, 
cherished by the Holy Spirit, and protected by God Himself. 
It 
NEEDS not your protection; it is YOURS. 
For it is deathless, and 
within it lies the END of death. 


T 19 J 9. 
What danger can assail the wholly innocent? What can attack 
the guiltless? What fear can enter and disturb the peace of sinless¬ 
ness? What has been given you, even in its infancy, is in full com¬ 
munication with God AND you. 
In its tiny hands, it holds, in perfect 
safety, every miracle you will perform, held out to YOU. 
The mira¬ 
cle of life is ageless, born in time, but nourished in eternity. 
Behold 
this infant, to whom you gave a resting place by your forgiveness of 
EACH OTHER, and see in it the Will of God. 
Here is the babe of 


1-662 


672 


Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


Bethlehem reborn. 
666 And everyone who gives him shelter will fol¬ 
low him, NOT to the cross, but to the Resurrection and the Life. 
667 

T 19 J10. 
When anything seems to you to be a source of fear, when 
any situation strikes you with terror and makes your body tremble 
and the cold sweat of fear comes over it, remember it is ALWAYS 
for one reason; the ego has perceived it as a symbol of fear, a sign of 
sin and death. 
Remember, then, that neither sign nor symbol should 
be CONFUSED with source, for they must STAND FOR something 
OTF1ER than themselves. 
Their meaning CANNOT lie in them, but 
must be sought in what they REPRESENT. 
And they may thus mean 
everything or nothing, according to the truth or falsity of the IDEA 
which they reflect. 
T(725) -549 

T 19 J 11. 
Confronted with such seeming uncertainty of meaning, 
judge it not. 
Remember the holy Presence of the One GIVEN you to 
be the Source of judgment. 
Give it to Flim to judge FOR you, and 
say: 

"Take this from me and look upon it, judging it for me. 


Let me not see it as a sign of sin and death, nor use it for destruction. 


Teach me how NOT to make of it an OBSTACLE to peace, But let 
You use it FOR me, to FACILITATE its coming." T(726) -550 668 

T 19 K. 
Obstacles to Peace - IV. 
The Fear of God (Not present 
in Notes) 

T 19 K l. 
What would you see, WITHOUT the fear of death? What 
would you feel and think, if death held NO attraction for you? Very 
simply, YOU WOULD REMEMBER YOUR FATHER. 
The Creator of 
life, the Source of everything that lives, the Father of the Universe, 
and of the Universe of universes, and of everything that lies even 
BEYOND them, would you remember. 
And, as this Memory rises in 


666 Luke 2:12 And this will be the sign to you: You will find a Babe wrapped in swaddling cloths, lying 
in a manger.” 

667 John 11:25 Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. 
He who believes in Me, though he 
may die, he shall live.” 

668 March 13, 1967 


673 


1-663 



Volume I Text 


your mind, peace must still surmount a final obstacle, AFTER which 
is salvation completed, and the Son of God ENTIRELY restored to 
sanity. 
For here, your world DOES end. 


T 19 K 2. 
The fourth obstacle to be surmounted, hangs like a heavy 
veil before the face of Christ. 
Yet, as His face rises beyond it, shining 
with joy because Fie is in His Father's love, peace will lightly brush 
the veil aside and run to meet Flim, and to JOIN with Him at last. 


For this dark veil, which seems to make the face of Christ Himself 
like to a leper's, and the bright rays of His Father's Love which light 
Fiis face with glory appear as streams of blood, fades in the blazing 
light BEYOND it, when the fear of death is gone. 


T 19 K 3. 
This is the darkest veil, — upheld by the belief in death, and 
protected by its attraction. 
The dedication to death and to its sover¬ 
eignty is but the solemn vow, the promise made in secret to the ego, 
never to lift this veil, not to approach it, nor even to SUSPECT that it 
is there. 
This is the secret bargain, made with the ego, to keep what 
lies BEYOND the veil forever blotted out and unremembered. 
Here 
is your promise never to allow union to call you OUT of separation; 
the great amnesia in which the memory of God seems quite forgot¬ 
ten; the cleavage of your Self from you; TFiE FEAR OF GOD, the 
final step in your dissociation. 
T(727) -551 

T 19 K 4. 
See how the belief in death would seem to 'save' you. 
For, if 
this is gone, what can you fear but life? It is the attraction of death 
that makes life seem to be ugly, cruel, and tyrannical. 
You are no 
more afraid of death than of the ego. 
These are your chosen 
FRIENDS. 
For, in your secret alliance with them, you have agreed 
never to let the fear of God be lifted, so you could look upon the face 
of Christ, and join Him in His Father. 
Every obstacle that peace must 
flow across is surmounted in just the same way; the fear that 
RAISED it yields to the love beneath, and so the fear is gone. 
And so 
it is with this. 


T 19 K 5. 
The desire to get rid of peace and drive the Holy Spirit 
FROM you, fades in the presence of the quiet recognition that you 
love Him. 
The exaltation of the body is given up in favor of the 


1-664 


674 


Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


Spirit, which you love as you could NEVER love the body. 
And the 
appeal of death is lost forever, as love's attraction stirs and calls to 
you. 
From BEYOND each of these OBSTACLES to love. 
Love Itself 
has called, and each has been surmounted by the power of the at¬ 
traction of what lies BEYOND. 
Your WANTING fear SEEMED to be 
holding them in place. 
Yet, when you heard the voice of love BE¬ 
YOND them, you answered, and they disappeared. 


T 19 K 6. 
And now you stand in terror before what you swore never 
to look upon. 
Your eyes look down, remembering your promise to 
your "friends." The "loveliness" of sin; the delicate appeal of guilt, 
the "holy" waxen image of death, and the fear of vengeance of the 
ego you swore in blood not to desert, all rise and bid you NOT to 
raise your eyes. 
For you realize that if you look on THIS, and LET 
the veil be lifted, THEY WILL BE GONE FOREVER. 
All of your 
"friends," your "protectors," and your "home," will vanish. 
Nothing 
that you remember NOW, will you remember. 
T(728) -552 
T 19 K 7. 
It seems to you the world will utterly abandon you, if you 
but raise your eyes. 
Yet all that WILL occur is YOU will leave the 
world forever. 
This is the re-establishment of YOUR will. 
Look upon 
it, open-eyed, and you will nevermore believe that you are at the 
mercy of things BEYOND you, forces you can NOT control, and 
thoughts that come to you AGAINST your will. 
It IS YOUR WILL 
TO LOOK ON THIS. 
No mad desire, no trivial impulse to forget 
again, no stab of fear, nor the cold sweat of seeming death, CAN 
stand against your will. 
And what attracts you from BEYOND the 
veil, is also deep WITHIN you, unseparated from it, and COM¬ 
PLETELY One. 


T 19 L. 
The Lifting of the Veil (Not present in Notes ) 

T 19 L l. 
Forget not that you came this far TOGETHER. 
And it was 
surely NOT the ego that led you here. 
No obstacle to peace can BE 
surmounted through ITS help. 
IT does not open up its secrets, and 
bid you look at them, and go BEYOND them. 
IT would not have 
you see its weakness and learn it has NO power to KEEP you from 
the truth. 
The Guide Who brought you here REMAINS with you. 



675 


1-665 


Volume I Text 


and when you raise your eyes, you WILL be ready to look on terror 
with no fear at all. 
But first, lift up your eyes and look upon each 
other in innocence, born of COMPLETE forgiveness of each other's 
illusions, and through the eyes of faith, which see them not. 


T 19 L 2. 
No-one can look upon the fear of God unterrified, unless he 
has ACCEPTED the Atonement, and learned illusions are not real. 

No-one can stand before this obstacle alone, for he could not have 
REACHED it unless his brother walked beside him. 
And no-one 
would dare to LOOK on it, without COMPLETE forgiveness of his 
brother in his heart. 
Stand you here a while, and tremble not. 
You 
will be ready. 
Let us join together in a holy instant, here in this place 
where the purpose, GIVEN in a holy instant, has led you. 
And let us 
join in faith that He Who brought us here together will OFFER you 
the innocence you need, and that you will ACCEPT it for my love 
and His. 
T(729) -553 669 

T 19 L 3. 
Nor is it POSSIBLE to look on this too soon. 
This is the place 
to which everyone must come, when he is ready. 
Once he has found 
his brother, he IS ready. 
But merely to REACH a place is not 
enough. 
A journey without a purpose is still meaningless. 
And even 
when it is over, it seems to make no sense. 
How can you KNOW 
that it is over, unless you realize its purpose IS accomplished? Here, 
with the journey's end before you, you SEE its purpose. 
And it is 
here you choose whether to look upon it, or wander on, only to re¬ 
turn and make the choice again. 


T 19 L 4. 
To look upon the fear of God DOES need some preparation. 

Only the sane can look on stark insanity and raving madness with 
pity and compassion, but NOT with fear. 
For only if you SHARE in 
it does it seem fearful. 
And you DO share in it until you look upon 
each other with perfect faith and love and tenderness. 
Before com¬ 
plete forgiveness, you still stand unforgiving. 
You are afraid of God 
BECAUSE you fear each other. 
Those you do not forgive, YOU 
FEAR. 
And no-one reaches love, with FEAR beside him. 



669 March 17, 1963 


1-666 


676 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


T 19 L 5. 
This brother, who stands beside you, still seems to be a 
stranger. 
You do NOT know him, and your INTERPRETATION of 
him is VERY fearful. 
And you attack him still, to keep what seems to 
be YOURSELF unharmed. 
Yet in his hands IS your salvation. 
You 
see his madness, which you hate because you SHARE in it. 
And all 
the pity and forgiveness that would HEAL it, gives way to fear. 

Brothers, you NEED forgiveness of each other. 
For you will share in 
madness or in Heaven TOGETHER. 
And you will raise your eyes in 
FAITH together, or not at all. 


T 19 L 6. 
Beside each of you is one who offers you the chalice of 
Atonement, for the Holy Spirit is in him. 
Would you hold his sins 
AGAINST him, or accept his gift to YOU? Is this giver of Salvation 
your friend or enemy? Choose which he is, remembering that you 
will RECEIVE of him according to your choice. 
T(730) -554 He has IN 
HIM the power to forgive YOUR sins, as you for HIM. 
670 Neither 
can give it to himself alone. 
And yet your Savior stands beside each 
one. 
Let him be what he IS, and seek not to make of love an enemy. 


T 19 L 7. 
Behold your Friend, the Christ Who stands beside you. 
How 
holy and how beautiful He is! You THOUGHT He sinned, because 
you cast the veil of sin upon Him to HIDE His loveliness. 
Yet still 
He holds forgiveness out to you, to SHARE His holiness. 
This "en¬ 
emy," this "stranger" still offers you salvation as His Friend. 
The 
"enemies" of Christ, the worshippers of sin, know not Whom they 
attack. 
This is your brother, crucified by sin, and waiting for release 
from pain. 
Would you not OFFER him forgiveness, when only he 
can offer it to you? 

T 19 L 8. 
For HIS redemption he will give you yours, as surely as God 
created every living thing, and loves it. 
And he will give it truly, for 
it will be both offered and RECEIVED. 
There is no grace of Heaven 
that you cannot OFFER to each other, and receive from your most 


670 Luke 5:21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this that speaketh 
blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone? 

John 20:23 “If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you retain the sins of any, they 
are retained.” 


677 


1-667 



Volume I Text 


holy Friend. 
Let him withhold it not, for by receiving it, you offer it 
to HIM. 
And he WILL receive of you what YOU received of him. 

Redemption has been given you to give EACH OTHER, and thus 
receive it. 
Whom you forgive IS free. 
And what you give, YOU 
SHARE. 
Forgive the sins your brother THINKS he has committed, 
and all the guilt YOU see in him. 


T 19 L 9. 
Here is the holy place of RESURRECTION, to which we 
come again; to which we will RETURN until redemption is accom¬ 
plished AND RECEIVED. 
Think who your brother IS, before you 
would condemn him. 
And offer thanks to God that he is holy, and 
has been given the gift of holiness for YOU. 
Join him in gladness, 
and remove all trace of guilt from his disturbed and tortured mind. 

Help him to lift the heavy burden of sin you laid upon him, and he 
ACCEPTED as his own, and toss it lightly and with happy laughter 
AWAY from him. 
Press it not like thorns against his brow, nor nail 
him to it, unredeemed and hopeless. 
T(731) -555 
T 19 L 10. 
Give each other faith, for faith and hope and mercy ARE 
yours to give. 
671 Into the hands that give, the gift is given. 
Look on 
your brother, and see in him the gift of God you would RECEIVE. 
It 
is almost Easter, the time of Resurrection. 
Let us give redemption to 
each other, and SHARE in it, that we may rise as one in resurrection, 
and not SEPARATE in death. 
Behold the gift of freedom that I gave 
the Holy Spirit, for BOTH of you. 
And be you free together, as you 
offer TO the Holy Spirit this SAME gift, and, giving it, receive it OF 
Him, in RETURN for what you gave. 


T 19 L 11. 
He leadeth you and me together, that we might meet here, 
in this holy place, and make the SAME decision. 
672 Free your brother 
here, as I freed you. 
Give him the self-same gift, nor look upon him 
with condemnation of ANY kind. 
See him as guiltless as I look on 
you, and OVERLOOK the sins he THINKS he sees within himself. 

Offer each other freedom and complete release from sin, here in the 


671 1 Corinthians 13:13 And now abide faith, hope, love, these three: but the greatest of these is love. 

<:7 “ Psalm 23:2-3 He makes me to lie down in green pastures; He leads me beside the still waters. 
He 
restores my soul; He leads me in the paths of righteousness For His name’s sake. 



1-668 


678 



Chapter 19 - Beyond the Body 


garden of seeming agony and death. 
673 So will we prepare TO¬ 
GETHER the way unto the Resurrection of God's Son. 
And let him 
rise again to glad remembrance of his Father, Who knows no sin, no 
death, but ONLY life eternal. 
674 

T 19 L 12. 
Together we will disappear into the Presence BEYOND the 
veil, not to be lost, but FOUND; not to be seen, but to be KNOWN. 
675 
And, knowing, nothing in the plan God has established for salvation 
will be left undone. 
This is the journey's purpose, WITHOUT which 
IS the journey meaningless. 
Here is the Peace of God, given to you 
eternally by Him. 
Here is the rest and quiet that you seek, the REA¬ 
SON for the journey from its beginning. 
Heaven is the gift you OWE 
each other, the debt of gratitude you offer to the Son of God, in 

thanks for what he is, and what his Father created him to be. 
T(732) - 
556 

T 19 L 13. 
Think carefully how you would look upon the giver of this 
gift, for as you look on HIM, so will the gift ITSELF appear to be. 
As 
HE is seen as either the giver of guilt or of salvation, so will his OF¬ 
FERING be seen, and so RECEIVED. 
The crucified give pain, be¬ 
cause they ARE in pain. 
But the redeemed give joy, because they 
have been HEALED of pain. 
Everyone gives as he receives, but HE 
must choose what it will BE that he receives. 
And he will RECOG¬ 
NIZE his choice by what he gives, and what is given HIM. 
Nor is it 
given anything in hell or Heaven to INTERFERE with his decision. 



673 Luke 22:39-46 Coming out, He went to the Mount of Olives, as He was accustomed, and His 
disciples also followed Him. 
When He came to the place, He said to them, “Pray that you may not enter 
into temptation.” And He was withdrawn from them about a stone’s throw, and He knelt down and 
prayed, saying, “Father, if it is Your will, take this cup away from Me; nevertheless not My will, but 
Yours, be done.” Then an angel appeared to Him from heaven, strengthening Him. 
And being in agony, 
He prayed more earnestly. 
Then His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down to the ground. 

When He rose up from prayer, and had come to His disciples, He found them sleeping from sorrow. 

Then He said to them, “Why do you sleep? Rise and pray, lest you enter into temptation.” 

674 Matthew 20:19 And deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock and to scourge and to crucify. 
And the 
third day He will rise again. 


673 Luke 15:24 ‘For this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.’ And they began 
to be merry. 


Luke 15:32 It was right that we should make merry and be glad, for your brother was dead and is alive 
again, and was lost and is found. 



679 


1-669 



Volume I Text 


T 19 L 14. 
You came this far because the journey WAS your choice. 

And no-one undertakes to do what he believes is meaningless. 
What 
you had faith in still is faithful, and watches over you in faith so 
gentle, yet so strong, that it would lift you far beyond the veil, and 
place the Son of God safely within the sure protection of his Father. 

Here is the ONLY purpose that gives this world, and the long jour¬ 
ney THROUGH this world, whatever meaning lies in them. 
Beyond 
this, they ARE meaningless. 
You stand together, still without con¬ 
viction they HAVE a purpose. 
Yet it is GIVEN you to SEE this pur¬ 
pose in your holy Friend, and RECOGNIZE it as your own. 
T(733) 

55 7 676 


676 March 19, 1967 


1-670 


PROOF 


680 


COPY 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 

T 20 A. 
Introduction (Not present in Notes) 

T 20 A 1 . 
This is Palm Sunday, the celebration of victory, and the AC¬ 
CEPTANCE of the truth. 
Let us not spend this holy week brooding 
on the crucifixion of God's Son, but happily in the celebration of his 
RELEASE. 
For Easter is the sign of peace, not pain. 
A slain Christ 
has no meaning. 
But a RISEN Christ becomes the symbol of the Son 
of God's forgiveness upon HIMSELF; the sign he looks upon himself 
as healed and whole. 
677 

T 20 B. 
Holy Week (Not present in Notes) 

T 20 B 1. 
This week begins with palms and ends with lilies, the white 
and holy sign the Son of God is innocent. 
Let no dark signs of cruci¬ 
fixion intervene between the journey and its purpose; between the 
ACCEPTANCE of the truth and its EXPRESSION. 


T 20 B 2. 
This week we celebrate eternal life, NOT death. 
And we 
honor the perfect PURITY of the Son of God, and NOT his sins. 
Of¬ 
fer each other the gift of lilies, NOT the crown of thorns; the gift of 
love, and NOT the "gift" of fear. 
You stand beside each other, thorns 
in one hand and lilies in the other, uncertain which to give. 
Join now 
with me, and throw away the thorns, offering the lilies to REPLACE 
them. 
This Easter I would have the gift of your forgiveness, offered 
by you to me, and RETURNED by me to you. 
We CANNOT be 
united in crucifixion and in death. 
Nor can the Resurrection be 
complete 'til YOUR forgiveness rests on Christ, along with mine. 


T 20 B 3. 
A week is short, and yet this holy week is the symbol of the 
whole journey that the Son of God has undertaken. 
He started with 
the sign of victory, the promise of the Resurrection ALREADY given 
him. 
Let him not wander into the temptation of crucifixion, and DE¬ 
LAY him there. 
678 Help him go in peace BEYOND it, with the light 


677 [split paragraph] 

678 T 16 H 12. 
Forgive us our illusions, Father, and help us to accept our true relationship with You, in 
which there are NO illusions, and where none can ever enter. 
Our holiness is YOURS. 
What can there 


681 


1-671 



Volume I Text 


of his own innocence lighting his way to his redemption and release. 

Hold him not back with thorns and nails, when his redemption is so 
near. 
But let the whiteness of your shining gift of lilies speed him on 
his way to Resurrection. 
T(734) -558 

T 20 B 4. 
Easter is not the celebration of the COST of sin, but of it's 
END. 
If you see glimpses of the face of Christ behind the veil, look¬ 
ing between the snow white petals of the lilies you have received 
and GIVEN as your gift, you will behold each other's face, and 
RECOGNIZE it. 
I was a stranger, and you took me in, not knowing 
who I was. 
679 But, for your gift of lilies, you WILL know. 
In your 
FORGIVENESS of this stranger, alien to you and yet your ancient 
Friend, lie HIS release, and YOUR redemption WITH him. 
The time 
of Easter is a time of JOY, and not of mourning. 
Look on your risen 
Friend, and celebrate his holiness, along with me. 
For Easter is the 
time of YOUR salvation, along with mine. 
T(735) -559 680 

T 20 C. 
Thoms and Lilies (Not present in Notes ) 

T 20 C 1. 
Look upon all the trinkets made to hang upon the body or 
cover it, or for its use. 
See all the useless things made for its eyes to 
see. 
Think on the many offerings made for its pleasure, and remem¬ 
ber all these were made to make seem lovely what you hate. 
Would 
you employ this hated thing to draw your brother to you, and to 
attract HIS body's eyes? Learn you but offer him a crown of thorns, 
not recognizing it for what it is, and trying to justify your OWN in¬ 
terpretation of its value by HIS acceptance. 
Yet still the gift pro¬ 
claims his worthlessness to YOU, as his acceptance and delight ac¬ 
knowledges the lack of value HE places on himself. 



be in us that NEEDS forgiveness, when YOURS is perfect? The sleep of forgetfulness is only the 
unwillingness to remember YOUR forgiveness and Your Love. 
Let us not wander into temptation, for 
the temptation of the Son of God is NOT Your Will. 
And let us receive ONLY what YOU have given, 
and accept but this into the minds which You created, and which You love 
Matthew 6:13 “And do not lead us into temptation. 


But deliver us from the evil one. 


For Yours is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever.” Amen. 


679 Matthew 25:35 “For I was hungry and you gave Me food; I was thirsty and you gave Me drink; I 
was a stranger and you took Me in.” 

680 March 26, 1967 


1-672 


682 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


T 20 C 2. 
Gifts are not made through bodies, if they be truly given and 
received. 
For bodies can neither offer nor accept; hold out or take. 

Only the mind can value, and only the mind decides on what it 
would receive and give. 
And every gift it offers depends on what it 
WANTS. 
It will adorn its chosen home most carefully, making it 
ready to RECEIVE the gifts it wants, by offering them to those who 
come unto its home, or those it would ATTRACT to it. 
And there 
they will exchange their gifts, offering and receiving what their 
minds judge to be worthy of them. 


T 20 c 3. 
Each gift is an EVALUATION of the receiver AND THE 
GIVER. 
No-one but sees his chosen home an altar to HIMSELF. 
681 
No-one but seeks to DRAW to it the worshippers of what he placed 
UPON it, making it WORTHY of their devotion. 
And each has set a 
light upon his altar, that they may see what he has placed upon it, 
and take it for their own. 
Here is the value that you lay upon your 
brother, and on YOURSELF. 
Here is your gift to BOTH; T(736) -560 
your judgment upon the Son of God for what he is. 
Forget not that it 
is YOUR Savior to whom the gift is offered. 
Offer him thorns, and 
YOU are crucified. 
Offer him lilies, and it is YOURSELF you free. 


T 20 C 4. 
1 have great need for lilies, for the Son of God has not for¬ 
given me. 
And can I offer HIM forgiveness, when he offers thorns to 
me? For he who offers thorns to anyone is against me still, and who 


681 In the second sentence we read: “ No-one but sees his chosen home an altar to HIMSELF." We 
have a prepositional deficit here. 
There are at least two simple ways to fix this: 

1) No one but sees in his chosen home an altar to Himself... 
or 

2) No one but sees his chosen home as an altar to Himself. 


FIP chooses the second. 
After careful examination of the context, it appears that the “chosen home” 
(which can be the body, and in this example is) is not the altar per se, but that altars reside within 
homes. 
Homes are not altars, but they may contain altars. 
We thus feel that if the grammar is to be 
corrected, it should be in the manner of example 1, above, “Wo one but sees in his chosen home an 
altar to Himself, ” believing the FIP editors erred here. 


HOWEVER! There is poetic meter to consider. 
The original, with prepositional deficit, is better Iambic 
Pentameter than EITHER correction for grammar. 
This raises an issue which recurs, when grammar 
“errors” are required to preserve Iambic Pentameter, should they be left uncorrected? At the moment 
our choice is to leave them uncorrected but flag them with possible corrections. 
The latter is likely to be 
especially helpful to readers whose native tongue is not English and for whom grammar aberrations are 
prone to obscure the intended meaning. 
This passage is missing from the Notes , as is the whole of 
chapter 20. 
This is one instance where that missing primary source could be helpful. 



683 


1-673 



Volume I Text 


is whole WITHOUT him? 682 Be you his Friend for me, that I may be 
forgiven, and you may look upon the Son of God as whole. 
But look 
you first upon the altar in your chosen home, and see what you 
have laid upon it, to offer me. 
If it be thorns, whose points gleam 
sharply in a blood-red light, the body is your chosen home, and it is 
separation that you offer me. 


T 20 C 5. 
And yet the thorns are gone. 
Look you still closer at them 
now, and you will see your altar is no longer what it was. 
You look 
still with the body's eyes. 
And they CAN see but thorns. 
But you 
have asked for AND RECEIVED another sight. 
Those who accept 
the Holy Spirit's purpose as their own, share also in His vision. 
And 
what enables Him to SEE His purpose shine forth from every altar, 
now is yours as well as His. 
He sees NO strangers only dearly loved 
and loving Friends. 
He sees no thorns, but only lilies, gleaming in 
the gentle glow of peace that shines on everything He looks upon 
and loves. 


T 20 C 6. 
This Easter, look with DIFFERENT eyes upon each other. 

You HAVE forgiven me. 
And yet, I cannot USE your gift of lilies, 
while you see them not. 
Nor can YOU use what I have given, unless 
T(737) -561 you SHARE it. 
The Holy Spirit's vision is no idle gift, no 
plaything to be tossed about a while and laid aside. 
Listen and hear 
this carefully, nor think it but a dream; -- a careless thought to play 
with, or a toy you would pick up from time to time and then put by. 

For if you do, so will it be to you. 
You have the vision to look past 
ALL illusions. 
It has been given you to see no thorns, no strangers, 
and NO obstacles to peace. 


T 20 C 7. 
The fear of God is NOTHING to you now. 
Who is afraid to 
look upon illusions, KNOWING his Savior stands beside him? 
WITH him, your vision has become the greatest power for the UN¬ 
DOING of illusion that God Himself could give. 
For what God gave 

682 Matthew 12:30 “He who is not with Me is against Me, and he who does not gather with Me scatters 
abroad.” 

Luke 9:50 But Jesus said to him, “Do not forbid him, for he who is not against us is on our side.” 

John 19:5 Jesus therefore came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple garment. 
And Pilate 
saith unto them, Behold, the man! 


1-674 


684 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


the Holy Spirit, YOU have received. 
The Son of God looks unto 
YOU for his release. 
For you have asked for AND BEEN GIVEN the 
strength to look upon this final obstacle, and see no thorns nor nails 
to crucify the Son of God, and crown him king of death. 
Your cho¬ 
sen home is on the other side, BEYOND the veil. 
It has been care¬ 
fully prepared for you, and it is ready to receive you now. 


T 20 c 8. 
You will not see it with the body's eyes. 
But all you need, 
you have. 
Your home has called to you since time began, nor have 
you ever failed entirely to hear. 
You heard, but knew not HOW to 
look, nor WHERE. 
And now you KNOW. 
In you the knowledge lies, 
ready to be unveiled and freed from all the terror that kept it hid¬ 
den. 
There IS no fear in love. 
683 The song of Easter is the glad refrain 
the Son of God was NEVER crucified. 
Let us lift up our eyes to¬ 
gether, not in fear, but FAITH. 
684 And there WILL be no fear in us, 
for in our vision will be NO illusions. 
Only a pathway to the open 
door T(738) -562 of Heaven, the home we share in quietness, and 
where we live in gentleness and peace, as One together. 


T 20 c 9. 
Would you not have your holy brother lead you there? His 
innocence will light your way, offering you its guiding light and 
sure protection, and shining from the holy altar within him, where 
you laid the lilies of forgiveness. 
Let him be to you the Savior from 
illusions, and look on him with the new vision that looks upon the 
lilies, and brings YOU joy. 
We go beyond the veil of fear, lighting 
each other's way. 
The holiness that leads us is WITHIN us, as is our 
home. 
So will we find what we were MEANT to find, by Him Who 
leads us. 


T 20 C 10. 
This is the way to Heaven and to the peace of Easter, in 
which we join in glad awareness that the Son of God is risen from 
the past, and has awakened to the present. 
Now is he free, unlimited 
in his communion with all that is within him. 
Now are the lilies of 
his innocence untouched by guilt, and perfectly protected from the 


683 1 John 4:18 There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear involves torment. 

But he who fears has not been made perfect in love. 


684 Psalm 121:1 1 will lift up my eyes to the hills- From whence comes my help. 



685 


1-675 



Volume I Text 


cold chill of fear and withering blight of sin alike. 
Your gift has 
saved him from the thorns and nails, and his strong arm is free to 
guide you safely through them, and BEYOND. 
Walk with him now 
rejoicing, for the Savior from illusions has come to greet you, and 
lead you home with HIM. 


T 20 C 11. 
Here is your Savior and your Friend, RELEASED from cru¬ 
cifixion through YOUR vision, and free to lead you now where HE 
would be. 
He will not leave you, nor forsake the Savior from HIS 
pain. 
And gladly will you walk the way of innocence together, sing¬ 
ing as you behold the open door of Heaven, and T(739) -563 RECOG¬ 
NIZE the home that called to you. 
Give joyously to one another the 
freedom and the strength to lead you there. 
And come before each 
other's holy altar, where the strength and freedom wait, to offer and 
receive the bright awareness that leads you home. 
The lamp is lit in 
both of you, for one another. 
And by the hands that GAVE it to each 
other, shall both of you be led past fear to Love. 
T(740) -564 

T 20 D. 
Sin as an Adjustment (Not present in Notes ) 

T 20 D 1 . 
The 685 belief in sin is an ADJUSTMENT. 
And an adjustment 
is a CHANGE, a shift in perception, or a belief that what was so be¬ 
fore has been made DIFFERENT. 
Every adjustment is therefore a 
DISTORTION, and calls upon defenses to uphold it AGAINST real¬ 
ity. 
Knowledge requires NO adjustment, and, in fact, is lost if any 
shift or change is undertaken. 
For this reduces it at once to mere 
perception; a way of LOOKING in which CERTAINTY is lost, and 
DOUBT has entered. 
To this IMPAIRED condition are adjustments 
necessary. 
BECAUSE THEY ARE NOT TRUE. 
Who need adjust to 
truth, which calls upon only what he IS, to understand? 

T 20 D 2. 
Adjustments of ANY kind are of the ego. 
For it is the ego's 
fixed belief that all relationships DEPEND upon adjustments, to 
make of them what it would have them be. 
DIRECT relationships, in 
which there are NO interferences, are ALWAYS seen as dangerous. 

The ego is the self-appointed mediator of ALL relationships, making 


685 March 30, 1967 


1-676 


686 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


whatever adjustments it deems necessary, and INTERPOSING them 
BETWEEN those who would meet, to keep them separate and PRE¬ 
VENT their union. 
It is this studied interference which makes it dif¬ 
ficult to recognize your holy relationship for what it is. 


T 20 D 3. 
The holy do not interfere with truth. 
They are NOT afraid of 
it, for it is WITHIN it that they RECOGNIZED their holiness, and 
rejoiced at what they saw. 
They looked on it directly, WITHOUT 
attempting to ADJUST themselves to it, or it to them. 
And so they 
saw that it was IN them, NOT deciding first where they would have 
it be. 
Their looking merely asked a question, and it was WHAT 
THEY SAW that answered . 
YOU make the world and THEN adjust 
to it. 
AND IT TO YOU. 
Nor is there any difference between yourself 
and it in your perception, WHICH MADE THEM BOTH. 
T(74l) -565 

T 20 D 4. 
A simple question yet remains, and NEEDS an answer. 
Do 
you LIKE what you have made? A world of murder and attack, 
through which you thread your timid way through constant dan¬ 
gers, alone and frightened, hoping at most that death will wait a lit¬ 
tle longer, before it overtakes you, and you disappear. 
YOU MADE 
THIS UP. 
It is a picture of what you think YOU are; of how you SEE 
yourself. 
A murderer IS frightened, and those who kill FEAR death. 

All these are but the fearful thoughts of those who would adjust 
themselves to a world MADE fearful by their adjustments. 
And they 
look out in sorrow from what is sad WITHIN, and see the sadness 
THERE. 


T 20 D 5. 
Have you wondered what the world is REALLY like? How 
would it look through HAPPY eyes? The world you see is but a 
judgment on YOURSELF. 
IT is not there at all. 
But judgment lays a 
sentence on it, JUSTIFIES it, and MAKES IT REAL. 
Such is the world 
you see; a judgment on yourself, and made by YOU. 
This sickly pic¬ 
ture of yourself is carefully preserved by the ego, whose image it IS 
and which it loves, and placed OUTSIDE you, in the world. 
And TO 
this world must YOU adjust, as long as you believe this picture IS 
outside, and has you at its mercy. 



687 


1-677 


Volume I Text 


T 20 D 6. 
This world IS merciless, and, were it outside you, you 
SHOULD indeed be fearful. 
But it is YOU who made it merciless. 

And now, if mercilessness SEEMS to look back at you, IT CAN BE 
CORRECTED. 
Who, in a holy relationship, can long remain unholy? 
The world the holy see is one with them, just as the world the ego 
looks upon is like itself. 
The world the holy see is beautiful, because 
they see their innocence in it. 
They did not TELL it what it was. 


They did not make adjustments to fit their orders. 
They gently ques¬ 
tioned it, and whispered "what are you?" And He Who watches 
over all perception answered. 
T(742) -566 

T 20 D 7. 
Take not the judgment of the world as answer to the ques¬ 
tion, "what am I?" The world BELIEVES in sin, but the belief that 
made it as you see it, is NOT outside you. 
Seek not to make the Son 
of God ADJUST to his insanity. 
There IS a stranger in him, who 
wandered carelessly into the home of Truth, and who will wander 
off. 
He came WITHOUT a purpose. 
But he will not remain before 
the shining light the Holy Spirit offered, and you accepted. 
For there 
the STRANGER is made homeless, and YOU are welcome. 
Ask not 
this transient stranger, "who am I?" He is the only thing in all the 
universe that does not know. 


T 20 D 8. 
Yet it is he you asked, and it is to HIS answer you would ad¬ 
just. 
This one wild thought, fierce in its arrogance and yet so tiny 
and so meaningless it slips unnoticed through the universe of truth, 
becomes your guide. 
To it you turn, to ask the MEANING of the 
universe. 
And of the one blind thing in all the seeing universe you 
ask, "how shall I look upon the Son of God?" Does one ask judg¬ 
ment of what is totally BEREFT of judgment? And if you HAVE, 
would you BELIEVE the answer? And ADJUST to it as if it were the 
truth? The world you look on IS the answer that it gave you. 
And 
YOU have given it power to ADJUST the world to MAKE its answer 
true. 


T 20 D 9. 
You asked this puff of madness for the meaning of your un¬ 
holy relationship, and adjusted it according to its insane answer. 

How happy did it make you? Did you meet with joy, to bless the 


1-678 


688 


Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


Son of God, and give him thanks for all the happiness he held out to 
you? Did you RECOGNIZE each other as the eternal gift of God to 
you? Did you see the holiness that shone in both of you, to bless the 
other? That is the purpose of your HOLY relationship. 
Ask not the 
means of its attainment of the one thing that still would have it be 
unholy. 
Give it NO power to ADJUST the means and end. 
T(743) -567 
T 20 D 10. 
Prisoners bound with heavy chains for years, starved and 
emaciated, weak and exhausted, and with eyes so long cast down in 
darkness they remember not the light, do not leap up in joy the in¬ 
stant they are made free. 
It takes a while for them to understand 
what freedom IS. 
You groped but feebly in the dust and found each 
other's hand, uncertain whether to let it go, or to take hold on life so 
long forgotten. 
Strengthen your hold, and raise your eyes unto your 
strong companion, in whom the meaning of your freedom lies. 
He 
seemed to be crucified beside you. 
And yet his holiness remained 
untouched and perfect, and with him beside you shall you this day 
enter with him to Paradise, 686 and know the peace of God. 


T 20 D ll. 
Such is my will for BOTH of you, and for each of you for 
one another, and for HIMSELF. 
Here there is only holiness, and join¬ 
ing without limit. 
For what is Heaven but union, direct and perfect, 
and WITHOUT the veil of fear upon it? Here are we one, looking 
with perfect gentleness upon each other, and on ourselves. 
Here, all 
thought of ANY separation between us becomes impossible. 
You 
who were prisoners in separation are now made free in Paradise. 

And here would I unite with you, my friends, my brothers, and my 
Self. 
Your gift unto each other has given me the certainty our union 


686 Luke 23:39-43 And one of the malefactors that were hanged railed on him, saying, Art not thou the 
Christ? Save thyself and us. 
But the other answered, and rebuking him said, Dost thou not even fear 
God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of 
our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiss. 
And he said, Jesus, remember me when thou comest 
in thy kingdom. 
And he said unto him, “Verily I say unto thee, Today shalt thou be with me in Para¬ 
dise.” 


689 


1-679 



Volume I Text 


will be soon. 
Share then this faith with me, who KNOW 687 that it is 
justified. 
T(744) -567 a 

T 20 D 12. 
There is no fear in perfect love, 688 BECAUSE it knows no 
sin. 
And it MUST look on others as on itself. 
Looking with charity 
within, what can it fear WITHOUT? The innocent see safety, and the 
pure see God 689 within His Son, and look unto the Son to lead them 
to the Father. 
690 And where else would they go, but where they will 
to be? Each of you now will lead the other to the Father, as surely as 
God created His Son holy, and kept him so. 
In your brother is the 
light of God's eternal promise of YOUR immortality. 
See HIM as 
sinless, and there can BE no fear in you. 
T(745) -568 691 

T 20 E. 
Entering the Ark (Not present in Notes) 

T 20 E l. 
Nothing can hurt you, unless you give it the power to do so. 

For YOU give power as the laws of this world INTERPRET giving; 
as you give, you LOSE. 
It is not up to you to give power at all. 


Power is of God, GIVEN by Him, and RE-AWAKENED by the Holy 
Spirit, Who knows that, as you give you GAIN. 
He gives NO power 
to sin, and therefore it HAS none. 
Nor to its results, as this world 
sees them; sickness and death and misery and pain. 
These things 
have not occurred, because the Holy Spirit sees them not, and gives 
no power to their seeming source. 
Thus would He keep you free of 
them. 


T 20 E 2. 
Being without illusion of what you are, the Holy Spirit 
merely gives EVERYTHING to God, Who has already given AND 
RECEIVED all that is true. 
The UNtrue He has neither received 


687 There is a grammar problem here, agreement in number. 
It should be “KNOWS” and may well be a 
typo. 
The HLC and FIP change “who” to “and” which is good grammar but substantially changes the 
meaning. 
The Notes is n ot available for this segment. 


688 1 John 4:18 There is no fear in love: but perfect love casteth out fear, because fear hath punishment; 
and he that feareth is not made perfect in love. 


John 14:6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. 
No one comes to the Father except 
through Me.” 

689 Matthew 5:8 “Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.” 

690 John 14:9 Jesus saith unto him, “Have I been so long time with you, and dost thou not know me, 
Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father; how sayest thou, Show us the Father?” 

691 April 5, 1967 


1-680 


690 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


NOR given. 
Sin has no place in Heaven, where its results are alien, 
and can no more enter than can their source. 
And therein lies your 
need to see your brother sinless. 
In him is Heaven. 
See sin in him 
INSTEAD, and Heaven is lost to YOU. 
But see him as he IS, and 
what is yours shines from him to you. 


T 20 E 3. 
Your Savior gives you ONLY love. 
But what you would RE¬ 
CEIVE of him, is up to you. 
It lies in him to overlook ALL your mis¬ 
takes, and therein lies his OWN salvation. 
And so it is with YOURS. 

Salvation is a lesson in giving, as the Holy Spirit interprets it. 
It is 
the re-awakening of the laws of God in minds that have established 
OTHER laws, and given them power to enforce what God created 
not. 
Your insane laws were made to GUARANTEE that you would 
make mistakes, and give them power over you by ACCEPTING 
their results as your just due. 
T(746) -569 

T 20 E 4. 
What COULD this be but madness? And is it THIS that you 
would see within your Savior FROM insanity? He is as free from 
this as you are, and in the freedom that you see in HIM, you see 
your own. 
For this you SHARE. 
What God has given follows HIS 
laws, and His alone. 
Nor is it possible for those who follow them to 
suffer the results of any other source. 
Those who choose freedom 
will experience only ITS results. 
Their power is of God. 
And they 
will give it only to what GOD has given, to SHARE with them. 


T 20 E 5. 
Nothing but this can touch them, for they see ONLY this, 
sharing their power according to the Will of God. 
And thus their 
freedom is established AND MAINTAINED. 
It is upheld through 
ALL temptations to imprison and to BE imprisoned. 
It is THEM, 
who learned of freedom, that you should ask what freedom IS. 
Ask 
not the sparrow how the eagle soars, for those with little wings have 
not accepted for THEMSELVES the power to share with you. 
The 
sinless give as they received. 
See, then, the power of sinlessness 
within your brother, and share with him the power of the RELEASE 
from sin you offered HIM. 


T 20 E 6. 
To each who walks this earth in seeming solitude is a Savior 
given, whose special function here is to release him, and so to free 


691 


1-681 


Volume I Text 


himself. 
In the world of separation, each is appointed separately, 
though they are all the same. 
But those who KNOW that they are all 
the same, need not salvation. 
And each one FINDS his Savior, when 
he is ready to look upon the face of Christ, and see Him sinless. 
The 
plan is not of you, nor need you be concerned with anything except 
the part that has been given YOU to learn. 
For He Who knows the 
rest will see to it WITHOUT your help. 
But think not that He does 
not need your part, to help Him with the rest. 
For in your part lies 
ALL of it, without which is no part complete, nor is the whole com¬ 
pleted WITHOUT your part. 
The ark of peace is entered two by 
two, 692 yet the beginning of another world goes with them. 
Each 
holy relationship T(747) -570 must enter here, to learn its special func¬ 
tion in the Holy Spirit's plan, now that it SHARES His purpose. 

And, as this purpose is fulfilled, a new world rises, in which sin can 
enter not, and where the Son of God can enter WITHOUT fear. 
And 
where he rests a while, to forget imprisonment, and to remember 
freedom. 


T 20 E 7. 
How can he enter, to rest and to remember, without YOU? 
Except you be there, he is NOT complete, and it is his COMPLE¬ 
TION that he remembers there. 
This is the purpose GIVEN you. 

Think not that your forgiveness of each other serves but you two 
alone. 
For the whole new world rests in the hands of every two who 
enter here, to rest. 
And as they rest, the face of Christ shines on 
them, and they remember the laws of God, forgetting all the rest, 
and yearning only to have His laws perfectly fulfilled in them and 
all their brothers. 


T 20 E 8. 
Think you, when this has been achieved, that you will rest 
WITHOUT them? You could no more leave one of them outside 
than I could leave you, and forget part of myself. 
You may wonder 
how you can BE at peace when, while you are in time, there is so 


6,2 Genesis 7:7-9 And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the 
ark, because of the waters of the flood. 
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of birds, 
and of everything that creepeth upon the ground, there went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, 
male and female, as God commanded Noah. 



1-682 


692 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


much that must be done BEFORE the way to peace is open. 
Perhaps 
this seems impossible to YOU. 
But ask yourself if it is possible that 
GOD would have a plan for your salvation that does NOT work. 

Once you accept HIS plan as the ONE function that you would ful¬ 
fill, there WILL be nothing else the Holy Spirit will not ARRANGE 
for you, WITHOUT your effort. 


T 20 E 9. 
He will go before you, making straight your path, and leav¬ 
ing in your way no stones to trip on, and no obstacles to bar your 
way. 
693 NOTHING you need will be denied you. 
Not one seeming 
difficulty but will melt away BEFORE you reach it. 
You need take 
thought for nothing, careless of everything except the only purpose 
that you would fulfill. 
As THAT was given you, so will its fulfill¬ 
ment be. 
God's guarantee will hold against T(748) -571 ALL obstacles, 
for it rests on certainty, and NOT contingency. 
IT RESTS ON YOU. 

And what can be more certain than the Son of God? 

T 20 F. 
Heralds of Eternity (Not present in Notes) 

T 20 F l. 
In this world, God's Son comes closest to himself in a holy 
relationship. 
There he begins to find the certainty his Father has in 
him. 
And there he finds his function of restoring his Father's laws to 
what was held OUTSIDE them, and finding what was lost. 
Only in 
time can anything BE lost, but never lost forever. 
So do the parts of 
God's Son gradually join in time, and with each joining is the end of 
time brought nearer. 
Each miracle of joining is a mighty herald of 
eternity. 
No-one who has a single purpose, unified and sure, can BE 
afraid. 
No-one who SHARES his purpose with him can NOT be one 
with him. 


T 20 F 2. 
Each herald of eternity sings of the end of sin and fear. 
Each 
speaks in time of what is far BEYOND it. 
Two voices, raised to¬ 
gether, call to the hearts of everyone, and let them beat as one. 
And 
in that single heart beat is the unity of love proclaimed and given 


6,3 Isaiah 40:3 The voice of one crying in the wilderness: “Prepare the way of the LORD; Make straight 
in the desert A highway for our God. 


John 1:23 He said: I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness: “Make straight the way of the 
LORD,” as the prophet Isaiah said. 



693 


1-683 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume I Text 


welcome. 
Peace to your holy relationship, which has the power to 
hold the unity of the Son of God together. 
You give to one another 
for EVERYONE. 
And in your gift is everyone made glad. 
Forget not 
Who has given YOU the gifts you give. 
And through your NOT for¬ 
getting this, will you remember Who gave the gifts to Him to give to 
you. 


T 20 F 3. 
It is impossible to over-estimate your brother's value. 
Only 
the ego does this, but all it means is that it WANTS the other for IT¬ 
SELF, and therefore values him too little. 
What is inestimable clearly 
cannot BE evaluated. 
Do you recognize the fear that rises from the 
meaningless attempt to judge what lies so far BEYOND your judg¬ 
ment you cannot even SEE it? Judge not what is invisible to you, or 
you will NEVER see it. 
But wait in patience for its coming. 
T(749) -572 
It will be GIVEN you to see your brother's worth, when all you 
WANT for him is peace. 
And what you want for HIM, you will re¬ 
ceive. 
694 

T 20 F 4. 
How can you estimate the worth of him who offers peace to 
you? What would you want EXCEPT his offering? His worth has 
been established by his Father, and you will RECOGNIZE it as you 
receive his Father's gift through him. 
What is in him will shine so 
brightly in your grateful vision, that you will merely love him, and 
be glad. 
You will not think to judge him. 
Who would SEE the face of 
Christ, and yet insist that judgment still has meaning? For this insis¬ 
tence is of those who do NOT see. 
Vision OR judgment is your 
choice, but never BOTH of these. 


T 20 F 5. 
Your brother's body is as little use to you as it is to him. 

When it is used ONLY as the Holy Spirit teaches, it has no function. 

For minds NEED not the body to communicate. 
The sight that SEES 
the body, has no use which serves the purpose of a holy relation¬ 
ship. 
And while you look upon each other thus, the means and end 
have NOT been brought in line. 
Why should it take so many holy 
instants to let this be accomplished, when one would do? There IS 


694 April 6, 1967 


1-684 


694 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


but one. 
The little breath of eternity that runs through time like 
golden light is all the same. 
Nothing before it; nothing afterwards. 


T 20 F 6. 
You look upon each holy instant as a DIFFERENT point in 
time. 
IT NEVER C1TANGES. 
All that it ever held or will ever hold is 
here right now. 
The past takes nothing FROM it, and the future will 
ADD no more. 
Here, then, is EVERYTHING. 
Here is the loveliness 
of your relationship, with means and ends in perfect harmony AL¬ 
READY. 
Here is the perfect faith that you will one day offer to each 
other, ALREADY offered you. 
And here the limitless forgiveness 
you will give each other is ALREADY given; the face of Christ you 
yet will look upon ALREADY seen. 
T(750) -573 

T 20 F 7. 
Can you EVALUATE the giver of a gift like this? Would you 
EXCHANGE this gift for ANY other? This gift returns the laws of 
God to your remembrance. 
And merely BY remembering them, the 
laws that held you prisoner to pain and death MUST be forgotten. 

This is no gift your brother's BODY offers you. 
The veil that hides 
the gift hides him as well. 
He IS the gift, and yet he knows it not. 
No 
more do you. 
And yet have faith that He Who sees the gift in BOTH 
of you, will offer and receive it for you BOTH. 
And through His vi¬ 
sion will YOU see it, and through His understanding RECOGNIZE 
it, and love it as your own. 


T 20 F 8. 
Be comforted, and feel the Holy Spirit watching over you, in 
love and perfect confidence in what He sees. 
He knows the Son of 
God. 
And shares his Father's certainty the universe rests in his gen¬ 
tle hands in safety and in peace. 
Let us consider now what he must 
learn, to SHARE his Father's confidence in him. 
What IS he, that the 
Creator of the universe should offer it to him, and KNOW it rests in 
safety? 695 He looks upon himself not as his Father knows him. 
And 
yet it is impossible the confidence of God should be misplaced. 



695 Psalm 8:4 What is man that You are mindful of him. 
And the son of man that You visit him? 
Hebrews 2:6 But one testified in a certain place, saying: “What is man that You are mindful of him, Or 
the son of man that You take care of him?” 


695 


1-685 



Volume I Text 

T 20 G. 
The Temple of the Holy Spirit (Not present in Notes ) 

T 20 G l. 
The meaning of the Son of God lies solely in his relationship 
with his Creator. 
If it were elsewhere, it WOULD rest upon contin¬ 
gency. 
But there IS nothing else. 
And this is wholly loving and for¬ 
ever. 
Yet has the Son of God invented an unholy relationship be¬ 
tween him and his Father. 
His REAL relationship is one of perfect 
union, and unbroken continuity. 
The one he made is partial, self- 
centered, broken into fragments and full of fear. 
The one created by 
his Father is wholly self-encompassing and self-EXTENDING. 
The 

one he made is wholly self-DESTRUCTIVE and self-LIMITING. 

T(751) -574 

T 20 G 2. 
Nothing 696 can show the contrast better than the experience 
of both a holy and an unholy relationship. 
The first is based on love, 
and rests on it serene and undisturbed. 
THE BODY DOES NOT IN¬ 
TRUDE UPON IT. 
Any relationship in which the body enters is 
based, NOT on love, but on idolatry. 
Love wishes to be known, 
COMPLETELY understood, and shared. 
697 IT HAS NO SECRETS; 
nothing that it would keep apart and hide. 
It walks in sunlight, 
open-eyed and calm, in smiling welcome, and in sincerity so simple 
and so obvious it cannot BE misunderstood. 


T 20 G 3. 
But idols do not share. 
Idols ACCEPT, but never make re¬ 
turn. 
They can BE loved, but cannot love. 
They do not understand 
what they are offered, and any relationship in which they enter, has 
LOST its meaning. 
The love of THEM has MADE love meaningless. 

They live in secrecy, hating the sunlight, and happy in the body's 
darkness, where they can hide, and keep their secrets hidden, along 
with them. 
And they have NO relationships, for no-one else is wel¬ 
come there. 
They smile on no-one, and those who smile on them 
they do not see. 



696 April 7, 1967 

697 1 Corinthians 13:4-7 Love suffers long and is kind; love does not envy; love does not parade itself, 
is not puffed up; does not behave rudely, does not seek its own, is not provoked, thinks no evil; does not 
rejoice in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth; bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures 
all things. 



1-686 


696 




Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


T 20 G 4. 
Love has no darkened temples, where mysteries are kept 
obscure and hidden from the sun. 
IT DOES NOT SEEK FOR 
POWER, but for RELATIONSHIPS. 
The body is the ego's chosen 
weapon for seeking power THROUGH relationships. 
And its rela¬ 
tionships MUST be unholy, for what they ARE, it does not even 
SEE. 
It wants them solely for the offerings on which its idols thrive. 

The rest it merely throws away, for all that IT could offer, is seen as 
valueless. 
Homeless, the ego seeks as many bodies as it can collect, 
to place its idols in, and so establish them as temples to itself. 


T 20 G 5. 
The Holy Spirit's temple is NOT a body, but a RELATION¬ 
SHIP. 
The body is an isolated speck of darkness; a hidden secret 
room, a tiny spot of senseless mystery, a meaningless enclosure 
carefully protected, yet T(752) -575 hiding nothing. 
Here, the unholy 
relationship escapes reality, and seeks for crumbs to keep itself 
alive. 
Here it would drag its brothers, holding them here in its idola¬ 
try. 
Here it is "safe," for here love CANNOT enter. 
The Holy Spirit 
does not build His temples where love can never be. 
Would He Who 
SEES the face of Christ choose as His home the only place in all the 
universe where it can NOT be seen? 

T 20 G 6. 
You CANNOT make the body the Holy Spirit's temple, and 
it will NEVER be the seat of love. 
It is the home of the idolater, and 
of love's CONDEMNATION. 
For here is love made fearful, and 
hope abandoned. 
Even the idols that are worshipped here are 
shrouded deep in mystery, and kept APART from those who wor¬ 
ship them. 
This is the temple dedicated to no relationships, and no 
return. 
Here is the "mystery" of separation perceived in awe and 
held in reverence. 
What God would have NOT be, is here kept 
"safe" from Him. 
But what you do NOT realize is what you fear 
within your brother, and would not SEE in HIM, is what makes God 
seem fearful and kept unknown. 


T 20 G 7. 
Idolaters will ALWAYS be afraid of love. 
For nothing so se¬ 
verely threatens them as love's approach. 
Let love draw near them 
and OVERLOOK the body, as it will surely do, and they retreat in 
fear, feeling the seeming firm foundation of their temple begin to 


697 


1-687 


Volume I Text 


shake and loosen. 
Brothers, you tremble with them. 
But what you 
fear is but the herald of escape. 
This place of darkness is NOT your 
home. 
Your temple is NOT threatened. 
You are idolaters no 
longer . 
698 The Holy Spirit's purpose lies safe in your RELATION¬ 
SHIP, and NOT your bodies. 
You have ESCAPED the body. 
Where 
you are now, the BODY cannot enter, for the Holy Spirit has set HIS 
temple there. 


T 20 G 8. 
There is no order in relationships. 
They either ARE, or not. 

An unholy relationship is NO relationship. 
It is a state of isolation, 
which SEEMS to be what it is NOT. 
No more than that. 
The instant 
that the T(753) -576 mad idea of making your relationship with God 
unholy seemed to be possible, ALL relationships were made mean¬ 
ingless. 
In that unholy instant time was born, and bodies made to 
house the mad idea, and give it the ILLUSION of reality. 
And so it 
SEEMED to have a home, that held together for a little while in time, 
and vanished. 
For what could house this mad idea AGAINST real¬ 
ity, but for an instant? 

T 20 G 9. 
Idols MUST disappear, and leave no trace behind their go¬ 
ing. 
The unholy instant of their seeming power is frail as is a snow¬ 
flake, but without its loveliness. 
Is this the substitute you WANT, 
for the eternal blessing of the holy instant, and its unlimited benefi¬ 
cence? Is the malevolence of the unholy relationship, so seeming 
powerful and so bitterly misunderstood, and so invested in FALSE 
attraction, your preference to the holy instant, which offers peace 
and understanding? Then lay aside the body and quietly TRAN¬ 
SCEND it, rising to welcome what you REALLY want. 
And from 
His holy temple look you not back on what you have awakened 
FROM . 
699 For no illusions CAN attract the minds that have TRAN¬ 
SCENDED them, and left them far behind. 



698 Ephesians 2:19 Now, therefore, you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with 
the saints and members of the household of God, 

699 Luke 9:62 But Jesus said to him, “No one, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit 
for the kingdom of God.” 


1-688 


698 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


T 20 G10. 
The holy relationship reflects the TRUE relationship the 
Son of God has with his Father in reality. 
The Holy Spirit rests 
within it, in the certainty it will endure forever. 
Its firm foundation 
is eternally upheld by truth, and love shines on it with the gentle 
smile and tender blessing it offers to its own. 
Here the unholy in¬ 
stant is exchanged in gladness for the holy one of safe return. 
Here 
is the way to true relationships held gently open, through which 
you walk together, leaving the body thankfully behind, and resting 
in the Everlasting Arms . 
700 Love's arms are open to receive you, and 
give you peace forever. 
T(754) -577 

T 20 G11. 
The body is the ego's idol; the belief in sin made flesh, and 
then projected outward. 
This produces what SEEMS to be a wall of 
flesh AROUND the mind, keeping it prisoner in a tiny spot of space 
and time, beholden unto death, and given but an instant in which to 
sigh and grieve and die in honor of its master. 
And this unholy in¬ 
stant SEEMS to be life. 
An instant of despair, a tiny island of dry 
sand, bereft of water, and set uncertainly upon oblivion. 
Here does 
the Son of God stop briefly by, to offer his devotion to death's idols, 
and then pass on. 


T 20 G12. 
And here he is more dead than living. 
But it is also here he 
makes his choice again, between idolatry and love. 
Here it is given 
him to choose to spend this instant paying tribute to the body, or 
LET himself be given freedom from it. 
Here he can ACCEPT the 
holy instant, offered him to REPLACE the unholy one he chose be¬ 
fore. 
And here can he learn relationships are his SALVATION, NOT 
his doom. 
You who ARE learning this may still be fearful, but you 
are NOT immobilized. 
The holy instant IS of greater value now to 
you than its unholy seeming counterpart, and you HAVE learned 
you REALLY want but one. 


T 20 G 13. 
This is no time for sadness. 
Perhaps confusion, but hardly 
discouragement. 
YOU HAVE A REAL RELATIONSHIP. 
And it 


' 00 Deuteronomy 33:27 The eternal God is thy dwelling-place, And underneath are the everlasting 
arms. 
And he thrust out the enemy from before thee, And said, Destroy. 



699 


1-689 



Volume I Text 


HAS meaning. 
It is as like your real relationship with God, as equal 
things are like themselves. 
Idolatry is past and meaningless. 
Perhaps 
you fear each other a little yet; perhaps a shadow of the fear of God 
remains with you. 
But what is that to those who have been given 
one TRUE relationship, BEYOND the body? Can they be long held 
back from looking on the face of Christ? And can they long with¬ 
hold the memory of their relationship with their Father FROM 
themselves, and keep remembrance of His Love APART from their 
awareness? T(755) -578 701 

T 20 H. 
The Consistency of Means and End (Not present in 
Notes) 

T 20 H 1 . 
We have said much about discrepancies of means and end, 
and how these must be brought in line before your holy relationship 
can bring you ONLY joy. 
But we have also said the means to meet 
the Holy Spirit's goal will come from the same Source as does His 
purpose. 
Being so simple and direct, this course has NOTHING in it 
that is not consistent. 
The SEEMING inconsistencies, or parts you 
find more difficult than others, are merely indications of areas 
where means and end are still discrepant. 
And this produces great 
discomfort. 
This NEED not be. 
This course requires almost NOTH¬ 
ING of you. 
It is impossible to imagine one that asks so little, or 
could offer more. 


T 20 H 2. 
The period of discomfort that follows the sudden change in 
a relationship from sin to holiness, should now be almost over. 
To 
the extent you still experience it, you are REFUSING to leave the 
means to Him Who changed the purpose. 
You recognize you 
WANT the goal. 
Are you not also willing to ACCEPT the means? If 
you are not, let us admit that YOU are inconsistent. 
A purpose is 
ATTAINED by means. 
And if you WANT a goal, you MUST be 
willing to want the means as well. 
How can one be sincere and say, 
"I want this above all else, and yet I do not want to learn the means 
to get it?" 


701 April 10, 1967 


1-690 


700 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


T 20 H 3. 
To obtain the GOAL, the Holy Spirit indeed asked little. 
He 
asks no more to give the means as well. 
The means are second to the 
goal. 
And, when you hesitate, it is because the PURPOSE frightens 
you, and NOT the means. 
Remember this, for otherwise you will 
make the error of believing the MEANS are difficult. 
Yet how CAN 
they be difficult, if they are merely GIVEN you? They GUARANTEE 
the goal. 
And they are PERFECTLY in line with it. 
Before we look at 
them a little closer, remember that if you think THEY are impossi¬ 
ble, your wanting of the PURPOSE has been shaken. 
For if a GOAL 

is possible to reach, the means to do so MUST be possible as well. 

T(756)-579 

T 20 H 4. 
It IS impossible to see your brother sinless, and yet to look 
upon him as a body. 
Is this not perfectly consistent with the goal of 
holiness? For holiness is merely the result of letting the effects of 
sins be lifted, so what was ALWAYS true is RECOGNIZED. 
To see a 
SINLESS body is impossible. 
For holiness is POSITIVE, and the 
body is merely neutral. 
It is NOT sinful, but neither is it sinless. 
As 
nothing, which it IS, the body cannot meaningfully be invested with 
attributes of Christ OR of the ego. 
EITHER must be an error, for 
both would place the attributes where they cannot BE. 
And BOTH 
must be undone, for purposes of truth. 


T 20 H 5. 
The body IS the means by which the ego tries to make the 
unholy relationship seem real. 
The unholy instant IS the time of 
bodies. 
But the PURPOSE here is sin. 
It cannot BE attained but in 
illusion. 
And so the illusion of a brother as a body is quite in keep¬ 
ing with the purpose of unholiness. 
BECAUSE of this consistency, 
the means remain unquestioned while the end is cherished. 
Vision 
adapts to wish, for sight is ALWAYS secondary to desire. 
And if 
you see the body, you have chosen judgment, and NOT vision. 
For 
vision, like relationships, HAS no order. 
You either SEE, or not. 


T 20 H 6. 
Who sees a brother's body has laid a JUDGMENT on him, 
and sees him not. 
He does not REALLY see him as sinful; he does 
not see him at all. 
In the darkness of sin, he is INVISIBLE. 
He can 
but be IMAGINED in the darkness, and it is here that the illusions 


701 


1-691 


Volume I Text 


you hold about him are NOT held up to his reality. 
Here are illu¬ 
sions and reality kept SEPARATED. 
Here are illusions NEVER 
brought to truth, and ALWAYS hidden from it. 
And here, in dark¬ 
ness, is your brother's reality IMAGINED as a body, in unholy rela¬ 
tionships with other bodies, serving the cause of sin an instant, be¬ 
fore he dies. 


T 20 H 7. 
There is indeed a difference between this vain imagining 
and vision. 
The difference lies not in THEM, but in their purpose. 

Both are but MEANS, each one appropriate to the end for which it is 
employed. 
Neither can serve T(757) -580 the purpose of the other, for 
each one is a CHOICE of purpose, employed on its behalf. 
Either is 
meaningless WITHOUT the end for which it was intended, nor is it 
valued as a SEPARATE thing, APART from the intention. 
The 
means seem real because the GOAL is valued. 
And judgment HAS 
no value unless the GOAL is sin. 
The body can NOT be looked upon 
EXCEPT through judgment. 
To see the body is the sign that you 
LACK vision, and have DENIED the means the Holy Spirit offers 
you, to serve HIS purpose. 


T 20 H 8. 
How can a holy relationship achieve its purpose through the 
means of sin? Judgment you taught YOURSELF; vision is learned 
from Him Who would UNDO your teaching. 
HIS vision cannot see 
the body, BECAUSE IT CANNOT LOOK ON SIN. 
And thus it leads 
you to reality. 
Your holy brother, sight of whom is YOUR release, is 
no illusion. 
Attempt to see him not in darkness, for your imaginings 
about him WILL seem real there. 
You CLOSED your eyes to shut 
him out. 
Such was your PURPOSE, and while this purpose seems to 
have ANY meaning, the means for its attainment will be evaluated 
as WORTH the seeing, and so you will NOT see. 


T 20 H 9. 
Your question should not be, "How can I see my brother 
without the body?" Ask only, "Do I REALLY wish to see him 
sinless?" And, as you ask, forget not that HIS sinlessness is YOUR 
escape from fear. 
Salvation is the Holy Spirit's goal. 
The means is 
vision. 
For what the seeing look upon IS sinless. 
No-one who loves 
can judge, and what he sees is FREE of condemnation. 
And what he 


1-692 


702 


Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


sees he did NOT make, for it was GIVEN him to see, as was the vi¬ 
sion which made his seeing possible. 


T 20 I. 
The Vision of Sinlessness (Not present in Notes) 

T 20 11 . 
Vision will come to you at first in glimpses, but they will be 
enough to show you what is given YOU who see your brother 
sinless. 


T 20 1 2 . 
Truth is restored to you through your desire, as it was lost to 
you through your desire for something ELSE. 
Open the holy place 
which you closed off by VALUING the something else, and what 
was never lost will T(758) -581 quietly return. 
It HAS been saved for 
you. 
Vision would not be necessary, had judgment not been made. 

Desire now its whole undoing, and it is done FOR you. 
Do you not 
WANT to know your own identity? Would you not happily ex¬ 
change your doubts for certainty? Would you not willingly be FREE 
of misery, and learn again of joy? Your holy relationship offers all 
this to you. 
As IT was given you, so will be its EFFECTS. 


T 2013. 
And as its holy purpose was not made by you, the means by 
which its happy end is yours is also not of you. 
Rejoice in what is 
yours but for the asking. 
And think not that you need make either 
means OR end. 
All this is GIVEN you, who would but SEE your 
brother sinless. 
All this is GIVEN, waiting on your desire but to RE¬ 
CEIVE it. 
Vision is freely given to those who ask to see. 
Your 
brother's sinlessness is given you in shining light, to look on with 
the Holy Spirit's vision, and to rejoice in, along with Him. 
For peace 
will come to all who ask for it with real desire and sincerity of pur¬ 
pose, SHARED with the Holy Spirit, and at one with Him on what 
salvation IS. 


T 2014. 
Be willing, then, to see your brother sinless, that Christ may 
rise before your vision, and give you joy. 
And place NO value on 
your brother's body, which held him to illusions of what he is. 
It is 
HIS desire to see his sinlessness, as it is YOURS. 
And bless the Son 
of God in your relationship, nor see in him what you have MADE of 
him. 
The Holy Spirit GUARANTEES that what God has willed and 


703 


1-693 


Volume I Text 


given shall be yours. 
This is YOUR purpose now, and the vision that 
makes it yours is ready to be given. 
You have the vision that enables 
you to see the body not. 
T(759) -582 702 And as you look upon each 

other, you will see an altar to your Father, holy as Heaven, glowing 
with radiant purity, and sparkling with the shining lilies you laid 
upon it. 


T 20 I 5. 
What can you value more than this? Why do you think the 
body is a better home, a safer shelter for God's Son? Why would you 
rather look on IT, than on the truth? How can the engine of destruc¬ 
tion be PREFERRED, and chosen to REPLACE the holy home the 
Holy Spirit offers, where HE will dwell WITH you? The body is the 
sign of weakness, vulnerability, and LOSS of power. 
Can such a 
Savior HELP you? Would you turn, in your distress and need for 
help, unto the HELPLESS? Is the pitifully LITTLE the perfect choice 
to call upon for strength? Judgment WILL seem to make your Savior 
weak. 
But it is YOU who need his strength. 


T 20 16 . 
There is no problem, no event or situation, no perplexity, that 
vision will not solve. 
All is redeemed, when looked upon with vi¬ 
sion. 
For this is not YOUR sight, and brings with it the laws beloved 
of Him Whose sight it IS. 
Everything looked upon with vision falls 
gently into place, according to the laws brought TO it by His calm 
and certain sight. 
The end, for everything HE looks upon, is AL¬ 
WAYS sure. 
For it will meet His purpose, seen in UNADJUSTED 
form, and suited perfectly to meet it. 
Destructiveness becomes be¬ 
nign, and sin is turned to blessing under His gentle gaze. 


T 2017. 
What can the body's eyes perceive, with power to COR¬ 
RECT? Its eyes ADJUST to sin, unable to overlook it in ANY form, 
and T(760) -583 seeing it EVERYWHERE, in EVERYTHING. 
Look 
through ITS eyes, and EVERYTHING will stand condemned before 
you. 
All that could SAVE you, you will never see. 
Your holy rela¬ 
tionship, the SOURCE of your salvation, will be DEPRIVED of 
meaning, and its most holy purpose bereft of means for its accom- 


702 April 11, 1967 


1-694 


704 



Chapter 20 - The Promise of the Resurrection 


plishment. 
Judgment is but a toy, a whim, the senseless means to 
play the idle game of death in your imagination. 
But vision sets all 
things right, bringing them gently within the kindly sway of 
Heaven's laws. 
T(76l) -583 a 703 

T 20 18. 
What if you recognized this world is a hallucination? What if 
you REALLY understood you made it up? What if you realized that 
those who SEEM to walk about in it, to sin and die, attack and mur¬ 
der and destroy themselves, are WHOLLY unreal? Could you have 
FAITH in what you see, if you ACCEPTED this? AND WOULD 
YOU SEE IT? Hallucinations disappear when they are RECOG¬ 
NIZED for what they are. 
This IS the healing and the remedy. 
Be¬ 
lieve them not, and they ARE gone. 
And all YOU need to do is rec¬ 
ognize YOU DID THIS. 
Once you ACCEPT this simple fact, and 
take unto YOURSELF the power you GAVE them, YOU are released 
from them. 


T 20 19. 
One thing is sure; hallucinations serve a purpose, and when 
that PURPOSE is no longer held, THEY disappear. 
Therefore, the 
question never is whether you want THEM, but ALWAYS do you 
want the purpose that they serve? This world SEEMS to hold out 
many purposes, each different, and with different values. 
Yet they 
are all the same. 
Again, there is no order, but a SEEMING hierarchy 
of values. 
Only two purposes are possible. 
And one is sin; the other 
holiness. 
Nothing is in between, and which you choose determines 
what you see. 
For what you see is merely HOW you elect to meet 
your goal. 


T 201 to. 
Hallucinations serve to meet the goal of madness. 
They are 
the means by which the OUTSIDE world, projected from within, 
ADJUSTS to sin, and SEEMS to witness to its reality. 
It still is true 
that nothing IS without. 
Yet, upon nothing, are ALL projections 
made. 
For it is the PROJECTION which gives the "nothing" ALL the 
meaning that it holds. 
What has NO meaning, cannot BE perceived. 

And meaning ALWAYS looks within, to find itself. 
And THEN 


April 14, ‘67 


705 


1-695 



Volume I Text 


looks out. 
ALL meaning that you give the world outside, must thus 
reflect the sight you saw WITHIN. 
Or better, IF you saw at all, or 
merely judged AGAINST. 
T(762) -584 

T 201 ll. 
Vision is the means by which the Holy Spirit translates your 
nightmares into happy dreams; your wild hallucinations, that show 
you all fearful outcomes of imagined sin, into the calm and reassur¬ 
ing sights with which He would replace them. 
These gentle sights 
and sounds are looked on happily, and heard with joy. 
They are HIS 
substitutes for all the terrifying sights and screaming sounds the 
ego's purpose brought to your horrified awareness. 
They step 
AWAY from sin, reminding you that it is NOT reality that frightens 
you, and that the errors which you made CAN be corrected. 


T 20 112. 
When you have looked on what seemed terrifying, and 
SEEN it change to sights of loveliness and peace; when you have 
looked on scenes of violence and death, and WATCHED them 
change to quiet views of gardens under open skies, with clear life- 
giving water running happily beside them in dancing brooks that 
never waste away; who need PERSUADE you to accept the gift of 
vision? And AFTER vision, who is there who COULD refuse what 
MUST come after? Think but an instant just on this. 
YOU can behold 
the holiness God gave His Son. 
And NEVER need you think that 
there IS something else for you to see. 
T(763) -585 


1-696 


706 


Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 

T 21 A. 
Introduction (Not present in Notes) 

T 21A l. 
Projection 704 makes perception; the world you see is what 
you GAVE it, nothing more than that. 
But, though it is no MORE 
than that, it is NOT less. 
Therefore, to YOU, it IS important. 
It is the 
witness to your state of mind, the OUTSIDE picture of an INWARD 
condition. 
As a man thinketh, so does he perceive. 
705 Therefore, seek 
not to change the WORLD, but will to change your mind ABOUT 
the world. 
Perception is a RESULT, and NOT a cause. 
And that is 
WHY order of miracles is meaningless. 
EVERYTHING looked upon 
with vision is healed and holy. 
NOTHING perceived without it 
means anything. 
And where there is no meaning, there is chaos. 


T 21 A 2. 
Damnation is your judgment on YOURSELF. 
And this you 
WILL project upon the world. 
See IT as damned, and all you see is 
what YOU did to hurt the Son of God. 
If you behold disaster and 
catastrophe, you tried to crucify him. 
If you see holiness and hope, 
you joined the Will of God to set him free. 
There is no choice that 
lies between these two decisions. 
And you will see the WITNESS to 
the choice you made, and learn from this to RECOGNIZE the one 
you made. 
The world you see but shows you how much joy YOU 
have allowed yourself to see in you, and to accept as YOURS. 
And, 
if this IS its meaning, then the power to GIVE it joy MUST lie 
WITHIN you. 


T 21 B. 
The Imagined World (Not present in Notes) 

T 21 B l. 
Never forget the world the sightless "see" MUST be imag¬ 
ined. 
And what it REALLY looks like IS unknown to them. 
They 
must infer what COULD be seen, from evidence forever indirect, 
and RECONSTRUCT their inferences as they stumble and fall be¬ 
cause of what they did NOT recognize, or walk unharmed through 


704 April 16, 1967 

705 Proverbs 23:7 For as he thinks in his heart, so is he. 
“Eat and drink!” he says to you, But his heart is 
not with you. 



707 


1-697 



Volume I Text 


open doorways that they THOUGHT were closed. 
And so it is with 
T(764) -586 you. 
You do NOT see. 
Your cues for inference are wrong, 
and so you stumble and fall down upon the stones you did not rec¬ 
ognize. 
But fail to be aware you CAN go through the doors you 
THOUGHT were closed, but which stand open before unseeing 
eyes, waiting to WELCOME you. 


T 21 B 2. 
How foolish it is to attempt to judge what could be seen in¬ 
stead. 
It is not necessary to IMAGINE what the world must look 
like. 
It must be SEEN, before you recognize it for what it is. 
You can 
be SHOWN which doors are open, and you can SEE where safety 
lies. 
And which way leads to darkness; which to light. 
Judgment 
will ALWAYS give you false directions. 
But vision SHOWS you 
where to go. 
Why should you guess? There is no NEED to learn 
through pain. 
And gentle lessons are acquired joyously, and are re¬ 
membered gladly. 
What gives you happiness you WANT to learn, 
and NOT forget. 


T 21 B 3. 
It is not this you would deny. 
YOUR question is whether the 
means by which this course is learned WILL bring the joy it prom¬ 
ises. 
If you BELIEVED it would, the LEARNING of it would be NO 
problem. 
You are not happy learners yet, because you still remain 
uncertain that vision gives you MORE than judgment does, and you 
HAVE learned that both you CANNOT have. 
The blind become 
ACCUSTOMED to their world by their adjustments TO it. 
They 
think they know their way about in it. 
They learned it not through 
joyous lessons, but through the stern necessity of limits they be¬ 
lieved they could not overcome. 
And, STILL believing this, they 
hold those lessons dear, and cling to them BECAUSE they cannot 
see. 


T 21 B 4. 
They do not understand the lessons KEEP them blind. 
This 
they do NOT believe. 
And so they keep the world they learned to 
T(765) -587 "see" in their imagination, believing that their choice is 
that, or nothing. 
They hate the world they learned through pain. 

And everything they think is in it, serves to remind them that THEY 
are incomplete and bitterly deprived. 
Thus they DEFINE their life 


1-698 


708 


Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


and where they live it, ADJUSTING to it as they think they must, 
afraid to lose the little that they have. 
And so it is with all who see 
the body as all they have, and all their brothers have. 
They try to 
reach each other, and they fail. 
And fail again. 
And they ADJUST to 
loneliness, believing that to KEEP the body is to SAVE the little that 
they have. 


T 21 B 5. 
Listen, and try to think if you remember what we will speak 
of now. 
Listen, — perhaps you catch a hint of an ancient state not 
quite forgotten; dim, perhaps, and yet not altogether unfamiliar. 


Like a song whose name is long forgotten, and the circumstances in 
which you heard completely unremembered. 
Not the whole song 
has stayed with you, but just a little wisp of melody, attached not to 
a person or a place, or anything particular. 
But you remember, from 
just this little part, how lovely was the song, how wonderful the set¬ 
ting where you heard it, and how you loved those who were there, 
and listened with you. 


T 21 B 6. 
The notes are nothing; yet you have kept them with you, not 
for themselves, but as a soft reminder of what would make you 
weep, if you remembered how dear it was to you. 
You COULD re¬ 
member, yet you are afraid, believing you would lose the world you 
learned since then. 
And yet you know that nothing in the world you 
learned is half so dear as this. 
Listen, and see if you remember an 
ancient song you knew so long ago, and held more T(766) -588 dear 
than any melody you taught yourself to cherish since. 
Beyond the 
body, beyond the sun and stars, past EVERYTHING you see and yet 
somehow familiar, is an arc of golden light that stretches, as you 
look, into a great and shining circle. 
And all the circle fills with light 
before your eyes. 


T 21 B 7. 
The edges of the circle disappear, and what is in it no longer 
is contained at all. 
The light expands and covers everything, extend¬ 
ing to infinity, forever shining, and with no break or limit anywhere. 

Within it, EVERYTHING is joined in perfect continuity. 
Nor is it 
possible to imagine that anything COULD be outside. 
For there IS 
nowhere that this light is not. 
This is the vision of the Son of God, 


709 


1-699 


Volume I Text 


whom you know well. 
Here is the sight of him who knows his Fa¬ 
ther. 
Here is the memory of what you ARE; a PART of this, with 
ALL of it within you, and JOINED to all of it as surely as all is joined 
to you. 


T 21 B 8. 
ACCEPT the vision that can show you this, and NOT the 
body. 
You KNOW the ancient song, and know it well. 
Nothing will 
ever be as dear to you as is this ancient hymn of love the Son of God 
sings to his Father still. 
And now the blind can see, for that same 
song they sing in honor of their Creator, gives praise to them as 
well. 
The blindness that they made will not withstand the memory 
of this song. 
And they will look upon the vision of the Son of God, 
remembering who he is they sing of. 
What is a miracle, but this re¬ 
membering? And who is there in whom this memory lies not? The 
light in one, awakens it in all. 
And, when you see it in each other, 
you ARE remembering for everyone. 
T(767) -589 

T 21 C. 
The Responsibility for Sight (Not present in Notes ) 

T 21 c l. 
We 706 have repeated how little is asked of you to learn this 
course. 
It is the same small willingness you need to have your whole 
relationship transformed to joy. 
The LITTLE gift you offer to the 
Holy Spirit, for which He gives you EVERYTHING. 
The very little, 
on which salvation rests. 
The tiny change of mind by which the cru¬ 
cifixion is changed to Resurrection. 
And, being true, it is so simple 
that it cannot fail to be COMPLETELY understood. 
Rejected, yes, 
but NOT ambiguous. 
And, if you choose AGAINST it now, it will 
NOT be because it is obscure, but rather that this LITTLE cost 
seemed, in YOUR judgment, to be TOO MUCH to pay for peace. 


T 21 C 2. 
This is the ONLY thing that you need do for vision, happi¬ 
ness, release from pain, and the COMPLETE escape from sin, ALL 
to be given you. 
Say ONLY this, but MEAN it with NO reservations, 
for here the power of salvation lies: 

"I AM responsible for what I see. 
I CHOSE the feelings I experience, 
and I DECIDED ON the goal I would achieve. 
And everything that 


706 April 18, 1967 


1-700 


710 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


SEEMS to happen TO me, I ASKED FOR and received as I had 
asked." 

Deceive yourself no longer that you are helpless in the face of what 
is done TO you. 
Acknowledge but that YOU have been mistaken, 
and ALL effects of your mistakes will disappear. 


T 21 c 3. 
It is impossible the Son of God be merely driven by events 
OUTSIDE him. 
It is impossible that the happenings that come to 
him were NOT his choice. 
His power of decision is the DETER¬ 
MINER of every situation in which he seems to FIND himself by 
chance or accident. 
No accident or chance is POSSIBLE within the 
universe as God created it, OUTSIDE of which is nothing. 
Suffer, 
and YOU decided sin was your goal. 
Be happy, and you GAVE the 
power of decision to Him Who MUST decide for God for you. 
This 
is the little gift you offer to the Holy Spirit, and even this He gave to 
you to give yourself. 
For, BY this gift, is given you the power to re¬ 
lease your Savior, that HE T(768) -590 may give salvation unto YOU. 


T 21 C 4. 
Begrudge not, then, this little offering. 
WITHHOLD it, and 
you keep the world as now you see it. 
GIVE IT AWAY, and every¬ 
thing YOU see goes with it. 
Never was so much given for so little. 
In 
the holy instant is this exchange effected and MAINTAINED. 
Here 
is the world you do NOT want, brought to the one you DO. 
And 
here the one you do is GIVEN you, BECAUSE you want it. 
But, for 
this, the POWER of your wanting must first be RECOGNIZED. 
You 
must accept its STRENGTH, and NOT its weakness. 
You must per¬ 
ceive that what is strong enough to MAKE a world, can let it go. 


And CAN accept correction, if it is willing to see that it was wrong. 


T 21 c 5. 
The world you see is but the idle witness that you were 
RIGHT. 
This witness is insane. 
You trained it in its testimony, and, 
as it gave it BACK to you, you listened and convinced yourself that 
what it saw was true. 
YOU DID THIS TO YOURSELF. 
See only this, 
and you will also see how circular the reasoning on which your 
"seeing" rests. 
This was NOT given you. 
This was your GIFT to you 
AND TO YOUR BROTHER. 
Be willing, then, to have it taken FROM 


711 


1-701 


Volume I Text 


him, and be replaced with truth. 
And, as you look upon the change 
in HIM, it will be given you to see it in YOURSELF. 
T(769) -591 
T 21 c 6. 
Perhaps 707 you do not see the need for you to give this little 
offering. 
Look closer, then, at what it IS. 
And, very simply, see in it 
the whole exchange of separation for salvation. 
All that the ego is, is 
an idea that it is possible that things should 708 HAPPEN to the Son 
of God, WITHOUT his will. 
And thus, without the Will of his Crea¬ 
tor, Whose Will cannot BE separated from his own. 
This is the Son 
of God's REPLACEMENT for his will, a mad revolt against what 
must forever be. 
This is the statement that he HAS the power to 
make God powerLESS. 
And so to take it from HIMSELF, and leave 
himself WITHOUT what God has willed FOR him. 


T 21 C 7. 
This is the mad idea you have enshrined upon your altars, 
AND WHICH YOU WORSHIP. 
And anything that threatens this, 
seems to ATTACK your faith. 
For here it is invested. 
Think not that 
you are faithless, for your belief and trust in THIS is strong indeed. 

The Holy Spirit can GIVE you faith in holiness, and vision to see it, 
easily enough. 
But you have not left open and unoccupied the altar 
where the gift belongs. 
Where THEY should be, YOU have set up 
your idols to something ELSE. 
This OTHER will, which seems to 
TELL you what must happen, you GAVE reality. 
And what would 
SHOW you otherwise must therefore seem unreal. 


T 21 c 8. 
All that is asked of you is to MAKE ROOM for truth. 
You 
are NOT asked to make or do what lies BEYOND your understand¬ 
ing. 
All you are asked to do is LET IT IN. 
Only to stop your INTER¬ 
FERENCE with what will happen OF ITSELF. 
Simply to recognize 
again the presence of what you THOUGHT you gave away. 
Be will¬ 
ing, for an instant, to leave your altars free of what YOU placed 
upon them and what is REALLY there you CANNOT fail to see. 
The 
holy instant is NOT an instant of creation, but of RECOGNITION. 

For recognition comes of vision and SUSPENDED judgment. 
Then 


707 April 20, 1967 

708 FIP changes this to “could” ... 
this portion is missing from the Notes. 



1-702 


712 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


only is it possible to look within and see what MUST be there, 
plainly in sight, and wholly INDEPENDENT of inference and 
judgment. 
T(770) -592 

T 21 c 9. 
Undoing 709 is not YOUR task, but it IS up to you to welcome 
it or not. 
Faith and desire go hand in hand. 
For everyone believes in 
what he wants. 
We have already said that wishful thinking is how 
the ego deals with what it wants, to make it so. 
There is no better 
demonstration of the power of wanting, and therefore of FAITH, to 
make its goals seem real and possible. 
Faith in the UNreal leads to 
ADJUSTMENTS of reality, to make it fit the goal of madness. 
The 
goal of sin induces the perception of a fearful world, to JUSTIFY its 
purpose. 
What you desire, you WIFE see. 
And if its reality is false, 
you will UPHOFD it by NOT realizing all the adjustments YOU 
have introduced, to MAKE it so. 


T 21 c 10. 
When vision is DENIED, confusion of cause and effect be¬ 
comes inevitable. 
The PURPOSE now becomes to KEEP OBSCURE 
the cause of the effect, and make effect appear to BE a cause. 
This 
seeming independence of effect enables it to be regarded as STAND¬ 
ING BY ITSELF, and capable of serving as a CAUSE of the events 
and feelings its maker thinks IT causes. 
Long ago, we spoke of your 
desire to create your own Creator, and be father and not Son to Him. 

This is the same desire. 
The Son is the effect, whose Cause he would 
deny. 
And so he seems to BE the cause, producing real EFFECTS. 


T 21 C 11 . 
Nothing can have effects WITHOUT a cause, and to con¬ 
fuse the two is merely to fail to understand them both. 
It is as need¬ 
ful that you recognize you MADE the world you see, as that you 
recognize that you did NOT create yourself. 
THEY ARE THE SAME 
MISTAKE. 
Nothing created NOT by your Creator, has ANY influ¬ 
ence over you. 
And if you think what YOU have made can TELL 
you what you see and feel, and place your faith in its ability to do 
so, you ARE denying your Creator, and BELIEVING that you made 
yourself. 
For, if you think the world you made has power to make 


709 April 21, 1967 


713 


1-703 



Volume I Text 


you what IT wills, you ARE confusing Son and Father; effect and 
Source. 
T(771) -593 

T 21 c 12. 
The Son's creations ARE like his Father's. 
But, in creating 
THEM, the Son does not delude himself that he is INDEPENDENT 
of his Source. 
His union with It is the SOURCE of his creating. 

APART from this, he HAS no power to create, and what he makes is 
meaningless. 
It changes NOTHING in creation, depends ENTIRELY 
upon the madness of its maker, and can NOT serve to justify the 
madness. 
Your brother thinks he made the world with you. 
Thus he 
denies creation. 
With you, he thinks the world he made, made HIM. 

Thus he denies he MADE it. 


T 21 C 13. 
Yet the truth is you were both created by a loving Father, 
Who created you together and as one. 
SEE what "proves" otherwise, 
and you DENY your whole reality. 
But grant that EVERYTHING 
that seems to stand BETWEEN you, keeping you from each other 
and separate from your Father, YOU MADE IN SECRET, and the 
instant of release has come to you. 
ALL its effects are gone, because 
its source has been uncovered. 
It is its seeming INDEPENDENCE of 
its source that kept you prisoner. 
This IS the same delusion that 
YOU are independent of the Source by which YOU were created, 
and have never left. 
T(772) -594 

T 21 D. 
Faith, Belief and Vision (Not present in Notes ) 

T 21 D l. 
All 710 special relationships have sin as their goal. 
For they 
are BARGAINS with reality, toward which the seeming union is ad¬ 
justed. 
Forget not this; to bargain is to set a limit, and any brother 
with whom you have a limited relationship YOU HATE. 
You may 
attempt to KEEP the bargain in the name of fairness, sometimes de¬ 
manding payment of your self, perhaps more often of the other. 


And in this "fairness," you attempt to ease the guilt that comes from 
the accepted PURPOSE of the relationship. 
And that is why the 
Holy Spirit must change its purpose, to make it useful unto HIM, 
and harmless unto YOU. 



710 April 23, 1967 


1-704 


714 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


T 21 D 2. 
If you ACCEPT this change, you have accepted the IDEA of 
making room for truth. 
The SOURCE of sin is gone. 
You may 
IMAGINE that you still experience its effects, but it is NOT your 
purpose. 
And you no longer WANT it. 
No-one allows a purpose to 
be REPLACED while he DESIRES it. 
For nothing is so cherished and 
protected, as is a goal the mind accepts. 
This it will follow, grimly or 
happily, but ALWAYS with faith, and with the persistence that faith 
INEVITABLY brings. 
The power of faith is NEVER recognized, if it 
is placed in sin. 
But it is ALWAYS recognized, if it is placed in love. 


T 21 D 3. 
Why is it strange to you that faith can move mountains? 711 
This is indeed a little feat for such a power. 
For faith can keep the 
Son of God in chains, as long as he believes he IS in chains. 
And, 
when he is RELEASED from them, it will be simply because he no 
longer BELIEVES in them, WITHDRAWING faith that they can hold 
him, and placing it in his freedom INSTEAD. 
It is impossible to 
T(773) -595 place equal faith in opposite directions. 
What faith you 
give to sin, you TAKE AWAY from holiness. 
And what you offer 
holiness, has been REMOVED from sin. 


T 21 D 4. 
Faith and belief and vision are the means by which the goal 
of holiness is reached. 
Through them, the Holy Spirit leads you to 
the real world, and AWAY from all illusions where your faith was 
laid. 
This is HIS direction, the only one He ever sees. 
And, when 
you wander. 
He REMINDS you there IS but one. 
HIS faith and HIS 
belief and vision, are all for you. 
And, when you have accepted 
them completely, INSTEAD of yours, you will have need of them no 
longer. 
For faith and vision and belief are meaningful only BEFORE 
the state of certainty is reached. 
In Heaven they are unknown. 
Yet 
Heaven is REACHED through them. 


T 21 D 5. 
It is impossible that the Son of God LACK faith. 
But he CAN 
choose where he would have it BE. 
Faithlessness is not a lack of 
FAITH, but faith in NOTHING. 
Faith given to illusions does NOT 


711 Matthew 17:20 So Jesus said to them, “Because of your unbelief; for assuredly, I say to you, if you 
have faith as a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move; 
and nothing will be impossible for you.” 


715 


1-705 



Volume I Text 


lack power, for, BY it, does the Son of God believe that he is power¬ 
less. 
Thus is he faithless to HIMSELF, but STRONG in faith in his 
illusions ABOUT himself. 
For faith, perception, and belief YOU 
made, as means for LOSING certainty, and finding sin. 
This mad 
direction was your CHOICE, and by your FAITH in what you 
chose, you made what you desired. 


T 21 D 6. 
The Holy Spirit has a use for all the means for sin by which 
you sought to FIND it. 
712 But, as HE uses them, they lead AWAY 
from sin, because His PURPOSE lies in the OPPOSITE direction. 
He 
sees the MEANS you use, but NOT the purpose for which you made 
them. 
He would not take them FROM you, for He sees their value as 
a means for what HE wills for you. 
You made perception, that T(774) 
-596 you might choose among your brothers, and seek for sin with 
them. 
The Holy Spirit sees perception as a means to teach you that 
the vision of a HOLY relationship is all you WANT to see. 


T 21 D 7. 
Then will you give your faith to holiness, desiring and BE¬ 
LIEVING in it, BECAUSE of your desire. 
Faith and belief become 
ATTACHED to vision, as all the means that once served sin are RE¬ 
DIRECTED now toward holiness. 
For what you think is sin is LIMI¬ 
TATION; and whom you try to limit to the body YOU HATE BE¬ 
CAUSE YOU FEAR. 
In your refusal to forgive him, you would 
CONDEMN him to the body, because the means for sin is dear to 
you. 
And so the BODY has your faith and your belief. 
But HOLI¬ 
NESS would set your brother free, removing hatred by removing 
fear, NOT as a symptom, but at its source. 


T 21 D 8. 
Those who would free their brothers from the body, can 
HAVE no fear. 
They have renounced the means for sin, by choosing 
to let all limitations be REMOVED. 
Desiring to look upon their 
brothers in holiness, the power of belief and faith goes far BEYOND 
the body, SUPPORTING vision, NOT obstructing it. 
But first they 
chose to RECOGNIZE how much their faith had limited their un- 


712 Romans 8:28 And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those 
who are called according to His purpose. 



1-706 


716 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


derstanding of the world, DESIRING to place its power elsewhere, 
should another point of view be GIVEN them. 
The miracles that fol¬ 
low this decision, are also born of faith. 
For all who choose to look 

AWAY from sin ARE given vision, and ARE led to holiness. 
T(775) - 
596a 

T 21 D 9. 
Those who believe in sin MUST think the Holy Spirit asks 
for sacrifice. 
For this is how they think THEIR purpose is accom¬ 
plished. 
Brothers, the Holy Spirit KNOWS that sacrifice brings 
NOTHING. 
He makes no bargains. 
And if you seek to limit Him, 
you will hate Him BECAUSE YOU ARE AFRAID. 
The gift that He 
has given you is more than ANYTHING that stands this side of 
Heaven. 
The instant for its recognition is at hand. 
713 Join your 
awareness to what has been ALREADY joined. 
The faith you give 
each other CAN accomplish this. 
For He Who LOVES the world is 
seeing it FOR you, without one spot of sin upon it, and in the inno¬ 
cence which makes the sight of it as beautiful as Heaven. 


T 21 D 10. 
Your faith in sacrifice has given it great power in your 
sight. 
Except you do not realize you CANNOT see, BECAUSE of it. 

For sacrifice MUST be exacted OF a body, and by ANOTHER body. 

The mind could neither ask it nor RECEIVE it of itself. 
And no more 
could the body. 
T(776) -597 The INTENTION is in the mind, which 
tries to USE the body to carry out the means for sin, in which the 
MIND believes. 
Thus is the JOINING of mind and body an INES¬ 
CAPABLE belief of those who value sin. 
And so is sacrifice IN¬ 
VARIABLY a means for limitation. 
And thus for hate. 



713 Matthew 3:2 and saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand!” 

Matthew 4:17 From that time Jesus began to preach and to say, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is 
at hand.” 

This notion of God, and his Kingdom being “at hand” or “as close to you as your hand” as soon as you 
“change your mind” is consistent through the New Testament and ACIM. 


While this teaching, “repent for the kingdom of heaven is at hand” is often understood to mean the final 
judgement and apocalyptic Armageddon, a truly fearful thought, “repent” can also be understood as 
“think again” or “change your mind” for “heaven is at hand” or “the kingdom of heaven is as close to 
you as your hand” similar to “the kingdom of heaven is within you.” John the Baptist is said to have 
preached this and Jesus’ ministry is said to have included this message early on. 
It is an oft-repeated 
theme in the New Testament and ACIM. 
Heaven is not some remote “pie-in-the-sky-when-you-die” so 
much as “at hand” and “within you” whenever judgement and guilt is replaced by forgiveness and love. 



717 


1-707 



Volume I Text 


T 21 D 11 . 
Think you the Holy Spirit is concerned with THIS? He 
GIVES not what it is His purpose to lead you FROM. 
You THINK 
He would deprive you FOR YOUR GOOD. 
But "good" and "depri¬ 
vation" are opposites, and CANNOT meaningfully join in ANY 
way. 
It is like saying that the moon and sun are one BECAUSE they 
come with night and day. 
And so they MUST be joined. 
Yet sight of 
one is but the sign the other has DISAPPEARED from sight. 
Nor is it 
possible that what GIVES light, be one with what DEPENDS on 
darkness to be seen. 
Neither demands the SACRIFICE of the other. 

Yet on the ABSENCE of the other does each depend. 


T 21 D 12. 
The body was made to BE a sacrifice to sin. 
And, in the 
darkness so it still is seen. 
Yet in the light of vision it is looked upon 
quite differently. 
You CAN have faith in it to serve the Holy Spirit's 
goal. 
And give it power to serve as means to help the blind to see. 

But, in their seeing, they look PAST it, as do you. 
The faith and the 
belief you gave it BELONG beyond. 
You gave perception and belief 
and faith from mind TO body. 
Let them now be given BACK to 
what PRODUCED them, and can use them still to SAVE itself from 
what it made. 
T(777) -598 

T 21 E. 
The Fear to Look Within (Notes 1569 10:129) 

T 21 E l. 
The 714 Holy Spirit will NEVER teach you that you are sinful. 

ERRORS He will correct, but this makes no-one fearful. 
You are in¬ 
deed afraid to look within, and see the sin you THINK is there. 
This 
you would NOT be fearful to admit. 
Fear in association with sin the 
ego deems quite appropriate, and smiles approvingly. 
IT has no fear 
to let you feel ashamed. 
It doubts not your belief and faith in sin. 
Its 
temples do not shake because of THIS. 
Your faith that sin is there 
but witnesses your desire that it BE there to see. 
This merely SEEMS 
to be the source of fear. 
Remember that the ego is NOT alone. 
Its 
rule IS tempered. 
And its unknown "Enemy," Whom it cannot even 
see, it FEARS. 



714 April 24, 1967 


1-708 


718 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


T 21 E 2. 
Loudly the ego tells you NOT to look inward, for if you do, 
your eyes will light on sin, and God will strike you blind. 
This you 
believe, and so you do NOT look. 
Yet this is NOT the ego's hidden 
fear, nor YOURS who serve it. 
Loudly indeed the ego claims it IS. 

TOO loudly and TOO often. 
For underneath this constant shout and 
frantic proclamation, the ego is NOT certain it is so. 
Beneath your 
fear to look within because of sin is yet ANOTHER fear, and one 
which makes the ego tremble. 
What if you looked within, and saw 
NO sin? This "fearful" question is one the ego NEVER asks. 
And 
you who ask it now ARE "threatening" the ego's whole defensive 
system too seriously for it to bother to PRETEND it is your friend. 


T 21E 3. 
Those who have joined their brothers HAVE detached them¬ 
selves from their belief that their identity lies in the ego. 
A holy rela¬ 
tionship is one in which you join with what IS part of you in 
TRUTH. 
And your belief in sin has been ALREADY shaken, nor are 
you now ENTIRELY unwilling to look within and see it NOT. 
Your 
liberation still is only partial; still limited and incomplete, yet born 
WITHIN you. 
Not wholly mad, you HAVE been willing to look on 
much of your insanity, and RECOGNIZE its madness. 
T(778) -599 
Your faith is moving inward, PAST insanity, and on to reason. 
And 
what your reason tells you now, the ego would not hear. 


T 21 E 4. 
The Holy Spirit's purpose was accepted by the part of your 
mind the ego knows not of. 
No more did YOU. 
And yet this part, 
with which you now identify, is NOT afraid to look upon ITSELF. 
It 
KNOWS that it is sinless. 
How otherwise COULD it have been will¬ 
ing to see the Holy Spirit's purpose as its own? This part has seen 
your brother, and RECOGNIZED him perfectly, since time began. 

And it desired nothing but to JOIN with him, and to be free again, 
as once it was. 
It has been waiting for the birth of freedom; the AC¬ 
CEPTANCE of release to come to you. 
And now you recognize that 
it was NOT the ego that joined the Holy Spirit's purpose, and so 
there MUST be something else. 


T 21 E 5. 
Think not that THIS is madness. 
For this your REASON tells 
you. 
And it follows PERFECTLY from what you have ALREADY 


719 


1-709 


Volume I Text 


learned. 
There is NO inconsistency in what the Holy Spirit teaches. 

This is the reasoning of the SANE. 
You have perceived the EGO'S 
madness, and NOT been made afraid, because you did not choose to 
SHARE in it. 
At times it still deceives you. 
Yet, in your saner mo¬ 
ments, its ranting strikes no terror in your hearts. 
For you have real¬ 
ized that all the gifts it would withdraw from you in rage at your 
"presumptuous" wish to look within, you do not WANT. 
The few 
remaining trinkets still seem to shine and catch your eye. 
Yet you 
would not "sell" Heaven to have them. 


T 21 E 6. 
And now the ego IS afraid. 
But what it hears in terror, the 
OTHER part hears as the sweetest music; the song it longed to hear 
since first the ego came into your minds. 
The ego's weakness is ITS 
strength. 
The song of freedom, which sings the praises of AN¬ 
OTHER world, brings to it hope of peace. 
For it REMEMBERS 
Heaven. 
And now it sees that Heaven HAS come to earth at last, 
from which the ego's rule has kept it out so long. 
Heaven has come 
because it T(779) -600 found a home in your relationship on earth. 


And earth can hold no longer what has been GIVEN Heaven as its 
own. 


T 21 E 7. 
Look gently on each other, and remember the ego's WEAK¬ 
NESS is revealed in BOTH your sight. 
What it would keep apart has 
met and joined, and looks upon the ego unafraid. 
Little children, 
innocent of sin, follow in gladness the way to certainty. 
Be not held 
back by fear's insane insistence that sureness lies in doubt. 
This HAS 
no meaning. 
What matters it to you how loudly it is proclaimed? 

The senseless is not made meaningful by repetition and by clamor. 

The quiet way is open. 
Follow it happily, and question not what 
MUST be so. 
T(780) -601 

T 21 F. 
Reason and Perception (Notes 1574 10:134) 

T 21 F l. 
Perception 715 selects, and MAKES the world you see. 
It liter¬ 
ally PICKS IT OUT, as mind directs. 
The laws of size and shape and 
brightness would hold, perhaps, if other things were equal. 
They are 


715 April 25, 1967 


1-710 


720 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


NOT equal. 
For what you look FOR you are far more likely to dis¬ 
cover, REGARDLESS of its color, shape, or size, than what you 
would prefer to OVERLOOK. 
The still small Voice for God, is NOT 
drowned out by all the ego's raucous screams and senseless ravings, 
to those who WANT to hear. 
716 Perception is a choice, and NOT a 
fact. 


T 21 F 2. 
But on this choice depends far more than you may realize as 
yet. 
For, on the voice you choose to hear, and on the sights you 
choose to see, depends ENTIRELY your whole belief of what you 
ARE. 
Perception is a witness but to this, and never to reality. 
Yet it 
can show you the conditions in which AWARENESS of reality is 
possible, or those where it could NEVER be. 
Reality needs no coop¬ 
eration from you, to be itself. 
But your awareness of it NEEDS your 
help, because it IS your choice. 


T 21 F 3. 
Listen to what the ego says, and see what it DIRECTS you 
see, and it is sure that you will see YOURSELF as tiny, vulnerable, 
and afraid. 
You WILL experience depression, a sense of worthless¬ 
ness, and feelings of impermanence and unreality. 
You WILL be¬ 
lieve that you are helpless prey to forces far beyond your own con¬ 
trol, and far more powerful than you. 
And you WILL think the 
world you made directs your destiny. 
For this will be your FAITFi. 

But never believe, because it is your faith, it makes REALITY. 
There 
is ANOTF1ER vision and ANOTL1ER voice, in which your freedom 
lies, awaiting but your choice. 
And, if you place your faith in them, 
you will perceive ANOTHER Self in YOU. 
T(78l) -602 
T 21 F 4. 
This 717 other self sees miracles as natural. 
They are as simple 
and as natural to it as breathing to the body. 
They are the OBVIOUS 
response to calls for help, the ONLY one it makes. 
Miracles seem 
unnatural to the ego, because it does not understand how SEPA¬ 
RATE minds can influence each other. 
Nor COULD they do so. 
But 
minds cannot BE separate. 
This other self is PERFECTLY aware of 


716 1 Kings 19:12 And after the earthquake a fire, but the LORD was not in the fire; and after the fire a 
still small voice. 


717 April 26, 1967 


721 


1-711 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume I Text 


this. 
And thus it recognizes that miracles do NOT affect AN¬ 
OTHER'S mind, only its OWN. 
They always change YOUR mind. 

There IS no other. 


T 21 F 5. 
You do not realize the whole extent to which the idea of 
separation has INTERFERED with reason. 
Reason lies in the other 
self you have CUT OFF from your awareness. 
And nothing you 
have allowed to STAY in it is CAPABLE of reason. 
How can the 
segment of the mind DEVOID of reason understand what reason IS? 
Or grasp the information it would give? All sorts of QUESTIONS 
may arise in it, but, if the basic question stems from REASON, it will 
not ask it. 
Like ALL that stems from reason, the basic question is 
obvious, simple, and remains unasked. 
But think not reason could 
not ANSWER it. 


T 21 F 6. 
God's plan for your salvation could not have been estab¬ 
lished WITHOUT your will and your consent. 
It MUST have been 
accepted by the Son of God, for what God wills for him, he MUST 
receive. 
For God wills not, apart from him. 
Nor does the Will of God 
wait upon time to be accomplished. 
Therefore, what JOINED the 
Will of God MUST be in you NOW, being eternal. 
You MUST have 
set aside a place in which the Holy Spirit can abide, and where He 
IS. 
He must HAVE BEEN there since the need for Him arose, and 
was fulfilled in the same instant. 


T 21 F 7. 
Such would your REASON tell you, if you listened. 
Yet such 
is clearly NOT the ego's "reasoning." Its alien nature, TO THE EGO, 
is proof you will NOT find the answer there. 
Yet if it MUST be so, it 
must exist. 
And, if it exists FOR you, and has your freedom as the 
purpose GIVEN it, you MUST be T(782) -603 free to FIND it. 
God's 
plan is simple; NEVER circular, and NEVER Self-defeating. 
He has 
no Thoughts except the Self-EXTENDING, and in this, YOUR will 
MUST be included. 
Thus there MUST be a part of you that KNOWS 
His Will and SHARES It. 


T 21 F 8. 
It is NOT meaningful to ask if what MUST be is so. 
But it IS 
meaningful to ask why you are UNAWARE of what is so. 
For this 
MUST have an answer, if the plan of God for your salvation is com- 


1-712 


722 


Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


plete. 
And it must BE complete, because its Source knows not of in¬ 
completion. 
Where would the answer BE, but in the Source? And 
where are YOU but there, where this same Answer is? Your iden¬ 
tity, as much a true EFFECT of this same Source as is this Answer, 
must therefore be TOGETHER and the SAME. 


T 21 F 9. 
Oh yes, you know this. 
And more than this alone. 
But any 
part of knowledge threatens dissociation as much as ALL of it. 
And 
all of it will COME with any part. 
Here is the part you CAN accept. 

What reason points to, you CAN see, because the witnesses on its 
behalf ARE clear. 
Only the TOTALLY insane can disregard them. 

And you HAVE gone past this. 
Reason is a means which serves the 
Holy Spirit's purpose in its OWN right. 
It is not RE-INTERPRETED 
and REDIRECTED from the goal of sin, as are the others. 
For reason 
is BEYOND the ego's range of means. 


T 21 F 10. 
Faith and perception and belief can be misplaced, and serve 
the great deceiver's needs, as well as truth . 
718 But reason has no 
place at all in madness, nor can it be ADJUSTED to fit its ends. 
Faith 
and belief are STRONG in madness, guiding perception toward 
what the mind has valued. 
But reason enters NOT AT ALL in this. 

For the perception would fall away at once, if reason were applied. 

There IS no reason in insanity, for it depends ENTIRELY on reason's 
absence. 
The ego NEVER uses it, because it does not realize that it 
EXISTS. 


T 21 F11 . 
The partially insane HAVE access to it. 
And only they have 
NEED of it. 
KNOWLEDGE does not depend on it, and madness 
keeps it OUT. 
The part of mind where reason lies was dedicated, by 
your will in union with your Father's, to T(783) -604 the UNDOING of 


718 Revelation 12:9 So the great dragon was cast out, that serpent of old, called the Devil and Satan, 
who deceives the whole world; he was cast to the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. 

Revelation 20:7-10 Now when the thousand years have expired, Satan will be released from his prison 
and will go out to deceive the nations which are in the four comers of the earth, Gog and Magog, to 
gather them together to battle, whose number is as the sand of the sea. 
They went up on the breadth of 
the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the beloved city. 
And fire came down from God out 
of heaven and devoured them. 
The devil, who deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and 
brimstone where the beast and the false prophet are. 
And they will be tormented day and night forever 
and ever. 



723 


1-713 




Volume I Text 


insanity. 
Here was the Holy Spirit's purpose accepted and accom¬ 
plished, both at once. 
Reason is ALIEN to insanity, and those who 
use it have gained a means which cannot BE applied to sin. 
Knowl¬ 
edge is far beyond attainment of ANY kind. 
But reason CAN serve 
to open doors you closed AGAINST it. 


T 21 F12. 
You have come very close to this. 
Faith and belief have 
shifted, and you HAVE asked the question that the ego will NEVER 
ask. 
Does not your reason tell you now the question MUST have 
come from something that you do NOT know, but must BELONG to 
you? Faith and belief, upheld by reason, CANNOT fail to lead to 
changed perception. 
And, in THIS change, is room made way for 
vision. 
Vision extends BEYOND itself, as does the purpose which it 
serves, and ALL the means for its accomplishment. 
T(784) -605 

T 21 G. 
Reason and Correction (Notes 1582 10:142) 

T 21 G l. 
Reason 719 cannot see sin, but CAN see errors, and LEADS to 
their correction. 
It does not value THEM, but their CORRECTION. 

But reason will also tell you when you THINK you sin you call for 
help, but if you will not ACCEPT the help you call for, you will not 
believe that it is yours to give. 
And so you WILL not give it, thus 
MAINTAINING the belief. 
For uncorrected error of ANY kind de¬ 
ceives you about the power that is IN you, to MAKE correction. 
If it 
CAN correct, and YOU allow it not to do so, you deny it to yourself 
AND TO YOUR BROTHER. 
And, if he SHARES this same belief, 
you BOTH will think that you are damned. 


T 21 G 2. 
This you COULD spare him AND YOURSELF. 
For reason 
would not make way for correction in you alone. 
Correction cannot 
BE accepted OR REFUSED by you, without your brother. 
SIN would 
maintain you can. 
But reason tells you that you CANNOT see your 
brother OR yourself as sinful, and still perceive the other innocent. 

Who looks upon himself as guilty, and sees a sinless world? And 
who can see a sinful world, and look upon himself APART from it? 


719 May 1, 1967 


1-714 


724 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


Sin would maintain you MUST be separate. 
But REASON tells you 
that this must be WRONG. 


T 21 G 3. 
If you are joined, how COULD it be that you have private 
thoughts? And how COULD thoughts that enter into what but 
SEEMS like yours alone, have no effect at all on what IS yours? If 
minds are joined, this IS impossible. 
No-one can think but for him¬ 
self, as God thinks not without His Son. 
Only were both IN BODIES 
could this be. 
Nor could one mind think only for itself, unless the 
body WERE the mind. 
For ONLY bodies can be separate, and there¬ 
fore UNREAL. 
The home of madness CANNOT be the home of rea¬ 
son. 
Yet it is easy to LEAVE the home of madness, if you see reason. 

T 21 G 4. 
You do not leave insanity by GOING somewhere else. 
You 
leave it simply by accepting reason, where madness WAS. 
Madness 
and reason see the same things, but it is certain that they look upon 
them differently. 
Madness is an ATTACK on reason, that drives it 
out of mind, and TAKES ITS PLACE. 
Reason does NOT T(785) -606 
attack, but takes the place of madness quietly, REPLACING mad¬ 
ness if it be the will of the insane to LISTEN to it. 
But the insane 
know not their will. 
For they BELIEVE they see the body, and LET 
their madness tell them it is real. 
REASON would be INCAPABLE 
of this. 
And, if you would defend the body AGAINST your reason, 
you will not understand the body OR yourself. 


T 21 G 5. 
The body does NOT separate you from your brother. 
And, if 
you think it does, you ARE insane. 
But madness has a purpose, and 
believes it also has the means to make its purpose real. 
To see the 
body as a barrier between what REASON tells you MUST be joined, 
MUST be insane. 
Nor COULD you see it, if you heard the voice of 
reason. 
What CAN there be that stands BETWEEN what is continu¬ 
ous? And, if there IS nothing in between, how can what enters part 
be kept AWAY from other parts? Reason would tell you this. 
But 
think what you must RECOGNIZE, if it be so. 
If you choose sin IN- 


725 


1-715 


Volume I Text 


STEAD of healing, you would condemn the Son of God to what can 
NEVER be corrected. 
720 

T 21 G 6. 
You tell him, BY your choice, that he is damned; separate 
from you and from his Father, forever and without a hope of safe 
return. 
You TEACH him this, and you will LEARN of him EX¬ 
ACTLY what you taught. 
For you can teach him only that he IS as 
you would HAVE him. 
And what you chose he be, is but your 
choice for YOU. 
Yet think not this is fearful. 
That you are JOINED to 
him is but a fact, NOT an interpretation. 
How can a fact be fearful, 
unless it DISAGREES with what you hold more dear than truth? 
Reason will tell you that this fact is your RELEASE. 
Neither your 
brother nor yourself can be attacked alone. 
But neither can accept a 
miracle instead, WITHOUT the other being blessed by it, and 
HEALED of pain. 


T 21 G 7. 
Reason, like love, would REASSURE you, and NOT seek to 
frighten you. 
The power to HEAL the Son of God is given you, BE¬ 
CAUSE he MUST be one with you. 
You ARE responsible for how he 
sees himself. 
But reason tells you it is GIVEN you to change his 
whole mind, which is one with YOU, in just an instant. 
And ANY 
instant serves to bring COMPLETE correction of his errors, and 
make him whole. 
The instant that you choose to let YOURSELF be 
healed, in that T(786) -607 same instant is his whole salvation seen as 
complete WITH yours. 
Reason is given you to UNDERSTAND that 
this is so. 
For reason, kind as is the purpose for which it is the 
means, leads steadily AWAY from madness, toward the goal of 
truth. 


T 21 G 8. 
And here you will lay down the burden of DENYING truth. 

THIS is the burden that is terrible, and NOT the truth. 
That you are 
JOINED is your salvation; the gift of Heaven, NOT the gift of fear. 

Does Heaven seem to be a BURDEN to you? In madness, yes; and 
yet what madness sees, MUST be dispelled by reason. 
Reason as- 


720 Mark 3:29 “but whosoever shall blaspheme against the Holy Spirit hath never forgiveness, but is 
guilty of an eternal sin.” 


1-716 


726 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


sures you Heaven is what you WANT, and ALL you want. 
Listen to 
Him Who SPEAKS with reason, and brings YOUR reason in line 
with HIS. 
Be willing to let reason be the means by which He would 
direct you how to leave INSANITY behind. 
Hide not BEHIND in¬ 
sanity, in order to ESCAPE from reason. 


T 21 G 9. 
What madness would CONCEAL, the Holy Spirit still holds 
out, for everyone to look upon with gladness. 
You ARE your 
brother's Savior. 
He is YOURS. 
Reason speaks happily indeed of 
this. 
This gracious plan was given love by Love. 
And what Love 
plans is like Itself in this: Being united. 
It would have you learn 
what YOU must be. 
And being ONE with It, it MUST be given you 
to give what IT has given, and gives still. 
Spend but an instant in the 
glad ACCEPTANCE of what is given you to give your brother, and 
learn, with him, what has been given BOTH of you. 


T 21 G10. 
To give is no MORE blessed than to receive. 
But neither is it 
LESS. 
721 The Son of God is ALWAYS blessed as one. 
And, as his 
gratitude goes out to you who blessed him, reason will tell you that 
it CANNOT be you stand APART from blessing. 
The gratitude he 
offers you reminds you of the thanks your Father gives you for 
completing HIM. 
And here alone does reason tell you that you can 
understand what you MUST be. 
Your Father is as close to you as is 
your brother. 
Yet what is there that could be nearer you, than is 
your Self? T(787) -608 

T 21 G11 . 
The power that YOU have over the Son of God is NOT a 
threat to his reality. 
It but ATTESTS to it. 
Where COULD his free¬ 
dom lie but in himself, if he be free ALREADY? And who could 
bind him but HIMSELF, if he DENY his freedom? God is not 
mocked; no more His Son can BE imprisoned, save by his own de¬ 
sire. 
722 And it is BY his own desire that he is freed. 
Such is his 


7 "' Acts 20:35 I have shown you in every way, by laboring like this, that you must support the weak. 

And remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that He said, “It is more blessed to give than to receive.” 
This is one instance where ACIM offers a “correction” to a Biblical teaching, in this case equating 
giving and receiving rather than suggesting the one is superior to the other. 
As we all are One, of 
course, any giving or receiving is an exchange within oneness. 


722 Job 13:9 Will it be well when He searches you out? Or can you mock Him as one mocks a man? 


727 


1-717 




Volume I Text 


STRENGTH, and NOT his weakness. 
He IS at his own mercy. 
And 
where he CHOOSES to be merciful, there is he free. 
But where he 
chooses to condemn instead, there is he held a prisoner, waiting in 
chains his pardon on HIMSELF, to set him free. 
T(788) -609 

T 21 H. 
Perception and Wishes (Notes 1589 10:149) 

T 21 H l. 
Do 723 you not see that all your misery comes from the 
strange belief that you are powerless? BEING HELPLESS IS THE 
COST OF SIN. 
Helplessness is sin's CONDITION; the ONE re¬ 
quirement that it demands, to be believed. 
Only the helpless 
COULD believe in it. 
Enormity has no appeal, save to the little. 
And 
only those who FIRST believe that they are little, could SEE attrac¬ 
tion there. 
Treachery to the Son of God is the defense of those who 
do NOT identify with him. 
And you are FOR him or AGAINST him; 
either you love him or attack him; protect his unity, or see him shat¬ 
tered and slain by your attack. 
724 

T 21 H 2. 
No-one believes the Son of God is powerless. 
And those 
who see themselves as helpless MUST believe that they are NOT the 
Son of God. 
What can they BE, except his enemy? And what can 
they do but ENVY him his power, and BY their envy, make them¬ 
selves AFRAID of it? These are the dark ones, silent and afraid, 
alone and not communicating, fearful the power of the Son of God 
will strike them dead, and raising up their helplessness AGAINST 
him. 
They join the army of the powerless, to wage their war of 
vengeance, bitterness, and spite on him, to make him one with 
THEM. 


T 21 H 3. 
Because they do not know that they are one with HIM, they 
know not WHOM they hate. 
725 They are indeed a sorry army, each 
one as likely to attack his brother or turn upon himself, as to re- 


Galatians 6:7 Do not be deceived, God is not mocked; for whatever a man sows, that he will also reap. 


723 May 5, 1967 

724 Matthew 12:30 “He who is not with Me is against Me, and he who does not gather with Me scatters 
abroad.” 

Luke 9:50 But Jesus said to him, “Do not forbid him, for he who is not against us is on our side.” 

725 Luke 23:34 Then Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.” And they 
divided His garments and cast lots. 



1-718 


728 



Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


member they THOUGHT they had a common cause. 
Frantic and 
loud and strong the dark ones SEEM to be. 
Yet they know not their 
enemy, EXCEPT THEY HATE HIM. 
In hatred they HAVE come to¬ 
gether, but have NOT joined EACH OTHER. 
For, had they done so, 
hatred would be impossible. 
The army of the powerless MUST be 
disbanded in the presence of STRENGTH. 
T(789) -610 

T 21 H 4. 
Those who are strong are NEVER treacherous, because they 
have no need to DREAM of power, and to act out their dream. 
How 
would an army ACT in dreams? Any way at all. 
They could be seen 
attacking ANYONE, with ANYTHING. 
Dreams have no REASON 
in them. 
A flower turns into a poisoned spear, a child becomes a gi¬ 
ant, and a mouse roars like a lion. 
And LOVE IS TURNED TO 
HATE as easily. 
This is no army, but a madhouse. 
What SEEMS to 
be a planned attack is bedlam. 
The army of the powerless is weak 
indeed. 
It has no weapons, and it has no enemy. 


T 21 H 5. 
Yes, it can overrun the world, and SEEK an enemy. 
But it 
can never FIND what is not there. 
Yes, it can DREAM it found an 
enemy, but this will shift even as it attacks, so that it runs at once to 
find another, and never comes to rest in victory. 
And, as it runs, it 
turns against itself, thinking it caught a glimpse of the great enemy 
that always eludes its murderous attack by turning into someone 
else. 
How treacherous does this enemy appear, who changes so, it is 
impossible even to RECOGNIZE him! Yet hate MUST have a target. 

There can BE no faith in sin without an enemy. 


T 21 H 6. 
Who that believes in sin would DARE believe he has NO 
enemy? COULD he admit that no-one MADE him powerless? Rea¬ 
son would surely bid him seek no longer what is NOT THERE to 
find. 
Yet first he must be WILLING to perceive a world where it is 
NOT. 
It is NOT necessary that he understand HOW he can see it. 

Nor should he try. 
For, if he focuses on what he CANNOT under¬ 
stand, he will but EMPHASIZE his helplessness, and let sin tell him 
his enemy must be HIMSELF. 
But let him only ask himself these 

questions, which he MUST decide to have it done FOR him: T(790) - 
611 


729 


1-719 


Volume I Text 


"Do I DESIRE a world I rule, instead of one where I AM ruled? 

Do I DESIRE a world where I am powerful, instead of helpless? 

Do I DESIRE a world in which I have NO enemies, and CANNOT 

sin ? 

And do I WANT to see what I denied, BECAUSE it is the truth?" 

T 21 H 7. 
You have ALREADY answered the first three questions, but 
not yet the last. 
For this one still seems fearful, and UNLIKE the oth¬ 
ers. 
Yet reason would assure you they are all the SAME. 
We said 
this year would emphasize the sameness of things that ARE the 
same. 
This final question which is indeed the last you need decide, 
still seems to hold a threat the rest have lost for you. 
And this imag¬ 
ined difference attests to your belief that TRUTH may be the enemy 
you yet may find. 
Here, then, would seem to be the last remaining 
hope of finding sin, and NOT accepting power. 


T 21 H 8. 
Forget not that the choice of truth or sin, power or helpless¬ 
ness, IS the choice of whether to attack or HEAL. 
For healing comes 
of POWER, and ATTACK of helplessness. 
Whom you attack, you 
CANNOT want to heal. 
And whom you would have healed, MUST 
be the one you chose to be PROTECTED from attack. 
And what IS 
this decision, but the choice whether to see him through the body's 
eyes, or let him be REVEALED to you through vision? HOW this 
decision leads to its effects is NOT your problem. 
But what you 
WANT to see, MUST be your choice. 
This is a course in CAUSE, and 
NOT effect. 
T(79l) -612 

T 21 H 9. 
Consider carefully your answer to the last question you 
have left unanswered still. 
And let your reason tell you that it MUST 
be answered, and IS answered in the other three. 
And then it WILL 
be clear to you that, as you look on the EFFECTS of sin, in ANY 
form, all you need do is simply ask yourself, "Is this what I WOULD 
see?" Do I WANT this?" This is your one decision; this the CONDI¬ 
TION for what occurs. 
It IS irrelevant to HOW it happens, but NOT 
to WHY. 
You HAVE control of this. 
And if you CHOOSE to see a 
world WITHOUT an enemy, in which you are NOT helpless, the 
MEANS to see it WILL be given you. 
T(792) -613 


1-720 


730 


Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


T 21 H 10. 
Why 726 is the final question so important? Reason will tell 
you why. 
It IS the same as are the other three, EXCEPT IN TIME. 


The others are decisions which can be made, and then UNmade, and 
made again. 
But truth is CONSTANT, and implies a state where 
vacillations are impossible. 
You can desire a world you rule, which 
rules you not, and CHANGE your mind. 
You can desire to exchange 
your helplessness for power, and LOSE this same desire as a little 
glint of sin attracts you. 
And you can want to see a sinless world, 
and let an "enemy" tempt you to use the body's eyes, and CHANGE 
what you desire. 


T 21 H11. 
In CONTENT all the questions ARE the same. 
For each one 
asks if you are willing to exchange the world of sin for what the 
Holy Spirit sees. 
For it IS this the world of sin denies. 
And therefore 
those who look on sin ARE seeing the DENIAL of the real world. 


Yet the last question adds the WISH FOR CONSTANCY in your de¬ 
sire to see the real world, so the desire becomes the ONLY one you 
have. 
By answering the final question "yes," you add SINCERITY to 
the decisions you have ALREADY made to all the rest. 
For only then 
have you RENOUNCED the option to change your mind AGAIN. 

When it is THIS you do NOT want, the rest are really answered. 


T 21 H12. 
Why do you think you are unsure the others HAVE been 
answered? COULD it be necessary they be ASKED so often, if they 
HAD? Until the last decision has been made, the answer IS both yes 
and no. 
For you HAVE answered "yes," without perceiving that yes 
MUST mean NOT NO. 
No-one decides AGAINST his happiness. 


But he MAY do so, if he does not know he DOES it. 
And, if he sees 
his happiness as ever-changing, now this, now that, and now an 
elusive shadow attached to nothing, he DOES decide against it. 


T 21 H 13. 
Elusive happiness, or happiness in changing forms that 
shift with time and place, is an illusion that has no meaning. 
Happi¬ 
ness MUST be constant, because it is ATTAINED by GIVING UP the 
wish for the INconstant. 
Joy cannot BE perceived, EXCEPT through 


726 May 6 1967 


731 


1-721 



Volume I Text 


constant vision. 
And constant T(793) -614 vision can be given only 
those who WISH for constancy. 
The power of the Son of God's de¬ 
sire remains the proof that he is wrong who sees himself as helpless. 

Desire what you will, and you shall look on it, and think it real. 
No 
thought but has the power to release or kill. 
And none can leave the 
thinker's mind, or leave him unaffected. 


T 211. 
The Inner Shift (Notes 1597 10:157) 

T 21 11 . 
Are thoughts, then, dangerous? To bodies, YES. 
The thoughts 
th44at seem to kill are those which teach the thinker that he CAN be 
killed. 
And so he dies, BECAUSE of what he learned. 
He goes from 
life to death, the final proof he valued the inconstant more than con¬ 
stancy. 
Surely he THOUGHT he wanted happiness. 
Yet he did NOT 
desire it BECAUSE it was the truth, and therefore MUST be con¬ 
stant. 
The constancy of joy is a condition quite alien to your under¬ 
standing. 
Yet, if you could even imagine what it MUST be, you 
would DESIRE it, although you UNDERSTAND it not. 


T 2112 . 
The constancy of happiness has NO exceptions, no change of 
ANY kind. 
It is unshakable as is the Love of God for His Creation. 

Sure in its vision as its Creator is in what He KNOWS, it looks on 
everything and SEES it is the same. 
It sees NOT the ephemeral, for it 
DESIRES that everything be like itself, and SEES it so. 
NOTHING 
has power to confound its constancy, because its OWN desire can 
not BE shaken. 
It comes as surely unto those who see the final ques¬ 
tion is NECESSARY to the rest, as peace MUST come to those who 
choose to heal, and NOT to judge. 


T 2113. 
Reason will tell you that you CANNOT ask for happiness 
inconstantly. 
For, if what you desire you RECEIVE, and happiness 
IS constant, then you need ask for it but ONCE, to have it ALWAYS. 

And, if you do NOT have it always, being what it IS, you did NOT 
ask for it. 
For no-one fails to ASK for his desire of SOMETHING he 
believes holds out some promise of the power of GIVING it. 
He may 
be wrong in WHAT he asks, WHERE, and OF WHAT. 
Yet he WILL 
ask, because desire IS a request, an ASKING FOR, and made by one 
whom God Himself will never fail to answer. 
T(794) -615 


1-722 


732 


Chapter 21 - The Inner Picture 


T 21 14. 
God has ALREADY given him all that he REALLY wants. 


But what he is uncertain of, God CANNOT give. 
For He does NOT 
desire it while he REMAINS uncertain, and God's giving MUST be 
incomplete unless it is RECEIVED. 
You who complete His Will and 
ARE His happiness, whose will is powerful as His, — a power that is 
NOT lost in your illusions, — think carefully why it should be you 
have not yet decided how you would answer the final question. 

Your answer to the others has made it possible to help you be but 
partially insane. 
And yet it is the final one that REALLY asks if you 
are willing to be WHOLLY sane. 


T 21 15. 
What is the holy instant but God's appeal to you to RECOG¬ 
NIZE what He has given you? Here is the great appeal to reason; the 
awareness of what is ALWAYS there to see; the happiness that 
COULD be ALWAYS yours. 
Here is the CONSTANT peace you 
could experience forever. 
Here is what denial has denied, RE¬ 
VEALED to you. 
For here the final question is ALREADY answered, 
and what you ask for, GIVEN. 
Here is the future NOW, for time is 
powerless BECAUSE of your desire for what will NEVER change. 

For you HAVE asked that nothing STAND BETWEEN the holiness 

of your relationship, and your AWARENESS of its holiness. 
T(795) - 
616 - 


733 


1-723 


Volume I Text 


Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

T 22 A. 
Introduction (Notes 160110:161) 

T 22 A l. 
Take 727 pity on yourselves, so long enslaved. 
Rejoice whom 
God hath joined have come together, and need no longer look on sin 
APART. 
728 No two can look on sin TOGETHER, for they COULD 
never see it in the same place and time. 
Sin is a strictly INDIVID¬ 
UAL perception, SEEN in the other, yet BELIEVED by each to be 
within HIMSELF. 
And each one seems to make a DIFFERENT error, 
and one the other cannot understand. 
Brothers, it IS the same, 
MADE by the same, and forgiven for its maker in the SAME way. 


T 22 A 2. 
The holiness of your relationship forgives you BOTH, undo¬ 
ing the effects of what you both believed AND saw. 
And, with their 
going, is the NEED for sin gone WITH them. 
Who has a need for 
sin? Only the lonely and alone, who see their brothers DIFFERENT 
from themselves. 
It is this DIFFERENCE, seen but not real, that 
makes the need for sin, not real but seen, seem justified. 
And all this 
WOULD be real, if sin were so. 
For an unholy relationship is BASED 
on differences, where each one thinks the OTHER has what HE has 
NOT. 


T 22 A 3. 
They come together, each to complete HIMSELF and ROB 
the other. 
They stay until they think there's nothing left to steal, and 
then move on. 
And so they wander through a world of strangers, 
UNLIKE themselves, living with their bodies perhaps beneath a 
common roof that shelters neither; in the same room and yet a 
world apart. 
A holy relationship starts from a different premise. 

Each one has looked within, and seen NO lack. 
ACCEPTING his 
completion, he would EXTEND it by JOINING with another, whole 
as himself. 



727 May 7 1967. 


728 Matthew 19:6 “So then, they are no longer two but one flesh. 
Therefore what God has joined 
together, let not man separate.” 


1-724 


734 



Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 


T 22 A 4. 
He sees no DIFFERENCES between these selves, for differ¬ 
ences are ONLY of the body. 
Therefore, he looks on nothing he 
would TAKE. 
He T(796) - 617 - denies NOT his own reality BECAUSE 
it is the truth. 
Just under Heaven does he stand, but close enough 
NOT to return to earth. 
For this relationship HAS Heaven's holiness. 

How far from home can a relationship so like to Heaven BE? Think 
what a holy relationship can teach! Here is BELIEF in differences 
undone. 
Here is the FAITH in differences shifted to sameness. 
And 
here is sight of differences transformed to VISION. 


T 22 A 5. 
And reason now can lead you to the logical conclusion of 
your union. 
IT must extend, as YOU extended when you joined. 
It 
must reach out BEYOND itself, as YOU reached out beyond the 
body, to LET yourselves be joined. 
And now the sameness which 
you saw extends, and finally removes ALL sense of differences, so 
that the sameness that lies beneath them all becomes apparent. 
Here 
is the golden circle, where you RECOGNIZE the Son of God. 
For 
what is born into a holy relationship can NEVER end. 
T(797) -617a 729 

T 22 B. 
The Message of the Holy Relationship (Notes 1604 
10:164) 

T 22 B l. 
Let reason take another step. 
If you attack whom God would 
heal, and hate the one He loves, then you and your Creator have a 
DIFFERENT will. 
Yet, if you ARE His Will, what you MUST then 
believe is that you are NOT yourself. 
You can, indeed, believe this, 
and you DO. 
And you HAVE faith in this, and see much evidence 
on its behalf. 
And where, you wonder, does your strange uneasi¬ 
ness, your sense of being disconnected, and your haunting fear of 
lack of meaning in yourself arise? It is as though you wandered in, 
without a plan of any kind except to wander off, for only that seems 
certain. 


T 22 B 2. 
Yet we have heard a very similar description earlier. 
But it 
was NOT of you. 
And yet, this strange idea which it DOES accu¬ 
rately describe, you think IS you. 
Reason would tell you that the 


729 May 13, 1967 


735 


1-725 



Volume I Text 


world you see through eyes that are not yours, MUST make no 
sense to you. 
To whom would vision such as this send BACK its 
messages? Surely not you, whose sight is wholly INDEPENDENT of 
the eyes which look upon the world. 
If this is NOT your vision, 
what can it show to YOU? The brain can NOT interpret what YOUR 
vision sees. 
This YOU would understand. 
The brain interprets to the 
body, of which it is a part. 
But what IT says, YOU cannot under¬ 
stand. 


T 22 B 3. 
Yet you have LISTENED to it. 
And long and hard you 
TRIED to understand its messages. 
You did not realize it is IMPOS¬ 
SIBLE to understand what fails ENTIRELY to REACH you. 
You 
have received NO messages at all you understood. 
For you have lis¬ 
tened to what can never communicate at all. 
Think, then, what hap¬ 
pened. 
Denying what you are, and firm in faith that you are some¬ 
thing ELSE, this something else, which you have MADE to be your¬ 
self, BECAME your sight. 
Yet it MUST be the SOMETHING ELSE 
which sees, and, as NOT YOU, explains its sight TO you. 


T 22 B 4. 
YOUR vision would, of course, render this quite unneces¬ 
sary. 
But, if your eyes are closed, and you have called upon this 
thing to lead you, asking it to EXPLAIN to you the world IT sees, 
you have no reason NOT to listen, nor to suspect that what it tells 
you is NOT true. 
Reason would tell you that it CAN'T be true, BE¬ 
CAUSE you do not understand it. 
GOD HAS NO SECRETS. 
He 
does NOT lead you through a world of misery, waiting T(798) -618 to 
tell you, at the journey's end, why He DID this to you. 
What could 
be secret from His Will? Yet you believe that YOU have secrets. 

What could your secrets BE except ANOTHER will, that is your 
own, APART from His? 

T 22 B 5. 
Reason would tell you that this is no SECRET, that need be 
hidden as a sin. 
But a MISTAKE indeed! Let not your fear of sin pro¬ 
tect it from correction, for the attraction of guilt is ONLY fear. 
Here 
is the ONE emotion that YOU made, WHATEVER it may seem to 
be. 
And it IS the emotion of secrecy, of private thoughts, AND OF 
THE BODY. 
This is the ONE emotion that opposes love, and AL- 


1-726 


736 





Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

WAYS leads to sight of differences, and LOSS of sense of sameness. 

Here is the ONE emotion that keeps you blind, dependent on the 
self you think you made, to lead you through the world it made for 
you. 


T 22 B 6. 
YOUR sight was GIVEN you, along with everything that 
you CAN understand. 
You will perceive NO difficulty in under¬ 
standing what this vision tells you. 
For everyone sees ONLY what 
he thinks he IS. 
And what YOUR sight will show you, you will un¬ 
derstand BECAUSE it is the truth. 
Only YOUR vision can convey to 
YOU what YOU can see. 
It reaches you directly, WITHOUT a need 
to be INTERPRETED to you. 
What NEEDS interpretation MUST be 
alien. 
Nor will it EVER be made understandable, by an interpreter 
you cannot understand. 
Of all the messages you have received and 
failed to understand, this course alone is OPEN to your understand¬ 
ing, and CAN be understood. 


T 22 B 7. 
This IS your language. 
You do not understand it yet, only 
because your whole communication is like a baby's. 
The sounds a 
baby makes, and what he hears, are highly unreliable, meaning 
DIFFERENT things to him at different times. 
Neither the sounds he 
hears, nor sights he sees, are stable yet. 
Yet what he hears and does 
not understand WILL BE his native tongue, through which he will 
communicate with those around him, and they with him. 
And the 
strange, shifting ones he sees about him will become to him his com¬ 
forters, and he will recognize his home, and see them there WITH 
him. 
T(799) -619 

T 22 B 8. 
So, in each holy relationship, is the ability to communicate 
INSTEAD of separate reborn. 
Yet a holy relationship, so recently 
reborn itself from an unholy relationship, and yet more ancient than 
the old illusion that it has replaced, IS like a baby now, in its rebirth. 

Yet, in this infant is YOUR vision returned to you, and he will speak 
the language BOTH of you can understand. 
He is not nurtured by 
the "something else" you THOUGHT was you. 
He was not GIVEN 
there, nor was received by anything EXCEPT yourself. 
For no two 


737 


1-727 


Volume I Text 


people CAN unite EXCEPT through Christ, Whose vision sees them 
one. 
730 

T 22 B 9. 
Think what is GIVEN you, my holy brothers. 
This child will 
teach you what you do not understand, and make it plain. 
For his 
will be no alien tongue. 
He will need NO interpreter to you. 
For it 
was YOU who taught him what he knows, BECAUSE you knew it. 

He could not come to anything BUT you, NEVER to something else. 

Where Christ has entered, no-one is alone, for never could He find a 
home in separate ones. 
Yet must He be reborn into His ancient 
home, so seeming new and yet as old as He, a tiny newcomer, de¬ 
pendent on the holiness of your relationship, to let Him live. 


T 22 B to. 
Be certain that God does not entrust His Son to the unwor¬ 
thy. 
Nothing but what is PART of Him is worthy of BEING joined. 

Nor is it possible that anything NOT part of Him CAN join. 
Com¬ 
munication MUST have been restored to those that join, for this they 
COULD not do through bodies. 
What, then, HAS joined them? Rea¬ 
son will tell you that they MUST have seen each other through a vi¬ 
sion NOT of the body, and communicated in a language the body 
does not speak. 
Nor could it be a fearful sight or sound that drew 
them gently into one. 
Rather, in each, the other saw a perfect shelter 
where his Self could be reborn in safety and in peace. 
Such did his 
reason tell him; such he believed BECAUSE it is the truth. 


T 22 B 11. 
Here is the first DIRECT perception that you have made. 


You made it through awareness older than perception, and yet re¬ 
born in just an instant. 
For what is time to what was ALWAYS so? 
Think what that instant brought; the RECOGNITION that the 
"something else" you thought was you T(800) -620 IS AN ILLUSION. 

And truth came instantly to show you where your self MUST be. 
It 
is denial of ILLUSIONS that calls on truth. 
For to deny illusions is to 
recognize that FEAR is meaningless. 
Into the holy home where fear 


730 Matthew 18:20 “For where two or three are gathered together in My name, I am there in the midst 
of them.” 


1-728 


738 



Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

is powerless, love enters thankfully, grateful that it is one with you 
who joined to LET it enter. 


T 22 B 12. 
Christ comes to what is LIKE Himself; the same, NOT dif¬ 
ferent. 
For He is ALWAYS drawn unto Himself. 
What is as like Him 
as a holy relationship? And what draws YOU together, draws HIM 
to you. 
Here is His sweetness, and His gentle innocence PRO¬ 
TECTED from attack. 
And here can He RETURN in confidence, for 
faith in one another is ALWAYS faith in Him. 
You are indeed cor¬ 
rect in looking on each other as His chosen home. 
For here you 
willed WITH Him and with His Father. 
This IS your Father's Will 
for you, and yours WITH Him. 
And who is drawn to Christ is 
drawn to God, as surely as both are drawn to every holy relation¬ 
ship, the home prepared for them as earth is turned to Heaven. 


T(801) -621 731 

T 22 C. 
Your Brother's Sinlessness (Notes 1612 10:172) 

T 22 C 1 . 
The OPPOSITE of illusions is not disillusionment, but truth. 

Only to the ego, to which TRUTH is meaningless, do they APPEAR 
to be the only alternatives, and DIFFERENT from each other. 
In 
truth, they are the SAME. 
Both bring the same amount of misery, 
though each one SEEMS to be the way to lose the misery the other 
brings. 
EVERY illusion carries pain and suffering in the dark folds 
of the heavy garments with which it hides its nothingness. 
Yet, in 
these dark and heavy garments, are those who SEEK illusions cov¬ 
ered, and hidden from the joy of truth. 
Truth is the opposite of illu¬ 
sions, BECAUSE it offers joy. 


T 22 c 2. 
What else BUT joy could be the opposite of misery? To leave 
one kind of misery and seek another, is hardly an ESCAPE. 
To 
change ILLUSIONS is to make NO change. 
The search for joy IN 
MISERY is senseless. 
For how COULD joy be found in misery? All 
that is possible in the dark world of misery is to select some AS¬ 
PECTS out of it, see them as DIFFERENT, and DEFINE the differ¬ 
ence as joy. 
Yet to PERCEIVE a difference where none exists will 


May 15, 1967 


739 


1-729 



Volume I Text 


surely fail to MAKE a difference. 
Illusions carry ONLY guilt and 
suffering, sickness and death, to their believers. 
The FORM in which 
they are accepted is irrelevant. 
NO form of misery, in reason's eyes, 
CAN be confused with joy. 


T 22 c 3. 
Joy is eternal. 
You can be sure indeed that any seeming hap¬ 
piness which does not last is really fear. 
Joy does NOT turn to sor¬ 
row, for the eternal cannot change. 
But sorrow CAN be turned to 
joy, for time gives way to the eternal. 
Only the timeless must remain 
unchanged. 
But everything in time can CHANGE with time. 
Yet, if 
the change be real and not IMAGINED, illusions MUST give way to 
truth, and not to other dreams which are but equally unreal. 
THIS is 
no difference. 
Reason will tell you that the ONLY way to escape 
from misery is to RECOGNIZE it, AND GO THE OTHER WAY. 


T 22 c 4. 
Truth is the same and misery the same, but they ARE differ¬ 
ent from each other. 
In EVERY way, in every INSTANCE, and 
WITHOUT EXCEPTION. 
To believe T(802) -622 that one exception can 
exist, is to confuse what IS the same with what is different. 
ONE il¬ 
lusion, cherished and defended AGAINST the truth, makes ALL 
truth meaningless and ALL illusions real. 
Such is the power of be¬ 
lief. 
It CANNOT compromise. 
And faith in innocence IS faith in sin, 
if the belief excludes ONE living thing, and holds it out, APART 
from its forgiveness. 
Both reason AND the ego will tell you this. 
But 
what they MAKE of it, is NOT the same. 


T 22 c 5. 
The ego will assure you now that it is IMPOSSIBLE for you 
to see NO guilt in anyone. 
And, if THIS vision is the ONLY means 
by which ESCAPE from guilt can be attained, then the belief in sin 
must be eternal. 
Yet reason looks on this in another way. 
For reason 
sees the SOURCE of an idea as what will make it true or false. 
This 
MUST be so, if the idea is LIKE its source. 
Therefore, says reason, if 
escape from guilt was given to the Holy Spirit as His purpose, and 
by One to Whom NOTHING He wills CAN BE impossible, the 
means for its attainment are MORE than possible. 
They must be 
THERE, and YOU must HAVE them. 



1-730 


740 


Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

T 22 C 6. 
This is a crucial period in this course. 
For here, the separa¬ 
tion of you and the ego MUST be made complete. 
For, if you FIAVE 
the means to let the Holy Spirit's purpose be accomplished, they 
CAN be used. 
And, THROUGH their use, will you gain faith in 
them. 
Yet, to the ego, they MUST be impossible, and no-one under¬ 
takes to do what holds NO hope of EVER being done. 
You KNOW 
what your Creator wills is possible. 
But what you MADE believes it 
is not so. 
Now MUST you choose between yourself and this 732 IL¬ 
LUSION of yourself. 
NOT both, but ONE. 


T 22 C 7. 
There is no point in trying to avoid this ONE decision. 
It 
MUST be made. 
Faith and belief can fall to either side, but reason 
tells you that misery lies ONLY on one side, and joy upon the other. 

FORSAKE NOT NOW EACH OTHER. 
T(803) -623 For you who ARE 
the same will NOT decide alone. 
OR DIFFERENTLY. 
Either you 
give each other life or death; either you are each other's Savior or his 
judge, offering him sanctuary or condemnation. 
This course will be 
believed ENTIRELY, or not at all. 
For it is wholly true or wholly 
false, and CANNOT be but partially believed. 
And you will either 
ESCAPE from misery entirely, or not at all. 


T 22 C 8. 
Reason will tell you that there IS no middle ground where 
you can pause uncertainly, waiting to choose between the joy of 
Heaven and the misery of hell. 
UNTIL you choose Heaven, you 
ARE in hell and misery. 
There is no PART of Heaven you can take, 
and weave into illusions. 
Nor is there ONE illusion you can enter 
Heaven WITH. 
A Savior cannot BE a judge, nor mercy condemna¬ 
tion. 
And vision CANNOT damn, but ONLY bless. 
Whose function 
is to save, WILL save. 
HOW He will do it IS beyond your under- 


732 The manuscript is typed “and ILLUSION” with “the” handwritten in between. 
The Notes rather 
clearly shows the glyph for “this” however so we’ve gone with that correction. 
In this example we see a 
common pattern in the editing. 
When a mistake is obvious, such as the omission of an article here is 
obvious, the editors often simply put in something that is grammatically correct without, apparently, 
checking the source. 
This also indicates that the correction was not made in the original oral 
transcription but later in the retyping. 
Had the error been noticed in that first transcription, we’d expect 
the correction to be correct. 
What we see here is more consistent with an inadvertent copy typing 
omission when the original Thetford Transcript was being re-typed which was then later noticed and 
“corrected” without reference to the Notes. 



741 


1-731 



Volume I Text 


standing, but WHEN must be your choice. 
For time YOU made, and 
time you CAN command. 
You are no more a slave to time than to 
the world you made. 


T 22 C 9. 
Let us look closer at the whole illusion that what you made 
has power to enslave its maker. 
This is the SAME belief that 
CAUSED the separation. 
It is the meaningless idea that thoughts can 
leave the thinker's mind, be DIFFERENT from it, AND IN OPPOSI¬ 
TION to it. 
If this were true, thoughts would not be the mind's ex¬ 
tensions, but its ENEMIES. 
And here we see again another form of 
the same fundamental illusion we have seen many times before. 

ONLY if it were possible the Son of God could LEAVE his Father's 
Mind, make himself DIFFERENT, and OPPOSE His Will, would it 
be possible that the self he made, and all IT made, should be his 
master. 


T 22 c 10. 
Behold the great projection, but look on it with the decision 
that it MUST BE HEALED, and NOT with fear. 
NOTHING you 
made has ANY power over you, unless you still would be APART 
from your Creator, and with a will OPPOSED to His. 
For ONLY if 
you would believe His Son COULD be His enemy, does it T(804) -624 
SEEM POSSIBLE that what YOU made is YOURS. 
YOU would con¬ 
demn His joy to misery, and make HIM different. 
And all the misery 
you made has been your own. 
Are you not GLAD to learn it is not 
true? Is it not welcome news to hear NOT ONE of the illusions that 
you made REPLACED the truth? 

T 22 C ll. 
Only YOUR thoughts have been impossible. 
Salvation 
CANNOT be. 
It IS impossible to look upon your Savior as your en¬ 
emy, and RECOGNIZE him. 
Yet it IS possible to recognize him for 
what he IS, if God would have it so. 
What God has given to your 
holy relationship IS THERE. 
For what He gave the Holy Spirit to 
give to you. 
He GAVE. 
Would you not look upon the Savior Who 
has been given you? And would you not exchange, in gratitude and 
gladness, the function of an executioner YOU gave him, for the one 
he has in truth? Receive of him what God has given him for you, 
NOT what YOU tried to give. 



1-732 


742 


Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

T 22 c 12. 
Beyond the bodies that you interposed between you, and 
shining in the golden light that reaches it from the bright endless 
circle that extends forever, is your holy relationship, beloved of God, 
and holy as Himself. 
How still it rests, in time and yet beyond, im¬ 
mortal yet on earth. 
How great the power that lies in it. 
Time waits 
upon its will, and earth will BE as it would HAVE it be. 
Here is no 
SEPARATE will, nor the desire that ANYTHING be separate. 
Its 
will HAS no exceptions, and what it wills is true. 
Every illusion 
brought to its forgiveness is gently OVERLOOKED, and disappears. 

For, at its center, Christ has been reborn, to light His home with vi¬ 
sion that overlooks the world. 


T 22 c 13. 
Would you not have this holy home be yours as well? No 
misery is here but ONLY joy. 
All you need do to dwell in quiet here 
with Christ is SHARE His vision. 
Quickly and gladly is His vision 
given to anyone who is but WILLING to see his brother sinless. 
And 
no-one CAN remain beyond this willingness, if YOU would be re¬ 
leased entirely from ALL effects of sin. 
Would you have PARTIAL 
forgiveness for yourself? Can YOU reach Heaven while a single sin 
still tempts you to remain in misery? Heaven is the home of perfect 
purity. 
And God created it for YOU. 
Look at your holy brother, 
sinless as yourself, and let him LEAD you there. 
T(805) -625 

T 22 D. 
Reason and the Holy Relationship (Notes 1620 
10:180) 

T 22 D 1. 
The introduction of reason into the ego's thought system is 
the beginning of its undoing. 
For reason and the ego are CONTRA¬ 
DICTORY. 
Nor is it possible for them to co-exist in your AWARE¬ 
NESS. 
And reason's goal IS to make plain, and therefore obvious. 

You can SEE reason. 
This is not a play on words, for here is the be¬ 
ginning of a vision that has meaning. 
Vision is sense, quite literally. 

If it is not the body's sight, it MUST be understood. 
FOR IT IS 
PLAIN, and what is obvious is NOT ambiguous. 
It CAN be under¬ 
stood. 
And here do reason and the ego separate, to go their DIF¬ 
FERENT ways. 



743 


1-733 


Volume I Text 


T 22 D 2. 
The ego's whole continuance depends on its belief you can¬ 
not learn this course. 
SHARE this belief, and reason will be unable 
to SEE your errors, and make way for their correction. 
For reason 
SEES THROUGH errors, telling you what you THOUGHT was real 
is not. 
Reason CAN see the difference between sin and mistakes, 
because it WANTS correction. 
Therefore it tells you what you 
thought was uncorrectable, CAN be corrected. 
And therefore MUST 
have been an error. 
The ego's OPPOSITION to correction leads to its 
fixed belief in sin, and DISREGARD of errors. 
IT looks on NOTH¬ 
ING that can be corrected. 


T 22 D 3. 
Thus does the ego damn, and reason save. 
Reason is not sal¬ 
vation in itself, but it MAKES WAY for peace, and brings you to a 
state of mind in which salvation can be given you. 
Sin is a block, set 
like a heavy gate, locked and WITHOUT a key, across the road to 
peace. 
No-one who looks on it without the help of reason, would 
TRY to pass it. 
The body's eyes behold it as solid granite, so thick it 
would be madness to ATTEMPT to pass it. 
Yet reason sees through 
it easily BECAUSE it is an error. 
The FORM it takes cannot conceal 
its emptiness from REASON'S eyes. 


T 22 D 4. 
ONLY the form of error attracts the ego. 
Meaning it does not 
RECOGNIZE, and does not know if it is there or not. 
Everything 
which the body's eyes can see T(806) -626 is a mistake, an error in per¬ 
ception, a distorted fragment of the whole, without the meaning that 
the whole would give. 
And yet mistakes, regardless of their form, 
can be corrected. 
Sin is but error in a special form the ego venerates. 

It would preserve ALL errors, and make them sins. 
For here is its 
OWN stability, its heavy anchor in the shifting world it made; the 
rock on which its church is built, and where its worshippers are 
bound to bodies, and believe the body's freedom is their own. 
733 
T 22 D 5. 
Reason will tell you that the FORM of error is not what 
makes it a mistake. 
If what the form CONCEALS is a mistake, the 


733 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 


1-734 


744 



Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

FORM can not prevent correction. 
The body's eyes see ONLY form. 

They cannot see BEYOND what they were MADE to see. 
And they 
were made to look on error, and NOT see past it. 
Theirs is indeed a 
strange perception, for they can see ONLY illusions, unable to look 
beyond the granite block of sin, and stopping at the outside FORM 
of nothing. 
To this distorted form of vision, the OUTSIDE of every¬ 
thing, the wall that stands between you and the truth, is wholly true. 

T 22 D 6. 
Yet how can sight which stops at nothingness, as if it WERE 
a solid wall, see truly? It is FIELD BACK by form, having been made 
to guarantee that nothing else BUT form will be perceived. 
These 
eyes, made NOT to see, will NEVER see. 
For the idea they represent 
left not its maker, and it is their maker that sees through them. 
What 
was its maker's GOAL, but not to see? For TF1IS the body's eyes are 
perfect means. 
But NOT for seeing. 
See how the body's eyes rest on 
externals, and CANNOT go beyond. 
Watch how they STOP at noth¬ 
ingness, unable to go BEYOND the form to meaning. 


T 22 D 7. 
Nothing so blinding as perception of form. 
734 For sight of 
form MEANS understanding F1AS BEEN obscured. 
Only MIS¬ 
TAKES have different forms, and so they CAN deceive. 
You CAN 
change form, BECAUSE it is not true. 
It COULD not be reality, BE¬ 
CAUSE it can be changed. 
Reason will tell you that, if form is NOT 
reality, it MUST be an illusion. 
And is Not TF1ERE to see. 
T(807) -627 
And, IF you see it, you MUST be mistaken, for you are seeing what 
can NOT be real, as if it WERE. 
What cannot see BEYOND what is 
not there, MUST be distorted perception. 
And must perceive illu¬ 
sions AS THE TRUTH. 
Could it, then, RECOGNIZE the truth? 

T 22 D 8. 
Let not the FORM of his mistakes keep you from him whose 
holiness is YOURS. 
Let not the vision of his holiness, the sight of 
which would show you YOUR forgiveness, be kept from you by 
what the body's eyes can see. 
Let your awareness of your brother 
NOT be blocked by your perception of his sins, and of his body. 



734 The grammar here is odd, and is improved if we make it “Nothing is so blinding as ..." but the Notes 
and all versions have it the same way. 



745 


1-735 



Volume I Text 


What is there in him that you would attack, EXCEPT what you asso¬ 
ciate with his body, which YOU believe can sin? BEYOND his errors 
is his holiness, and YOUR salvation. 
You gave him not his holiness, 
but tried to see your sins in him, to save yourself. 
And yet his holi¬ 
ness IS your forgiveness. 
Can YOU be saved by making sinful the 
one whose holiness IS your salvation? 

T 22 D 9. 
A holy relationship, however newly born, must value holi¬ 
ness above all else. 
Unholy values will produce confusion, and IN 
AWARENESS. 
In an unholy relationship, each one is valued BE¬ 
CAUSE he seems to justify the other's sin. 
He sees within the other 
what impels him to SIN AGAINST HIS WILL. 
And thus he lays his 
sins upon the other, and is ATTRACTED to him to PERPETUATE 
his sins. 
And so it MUST become impossible for each to see HIM¬ 
SELF as causing sin, by his DESIRE to have sin real. 
Yet reason sees 
a holy relationship as what it IS; a common state of mind, where 
both give errors gladly to correction, that both may happily be 
healed as one. 
T(808) -808a 735 

T 22 E. 
The Branching of the Road (Notes 1628 11:3) 

T 22 E l. 
Special Message 736 : 

When you come to the place where the branch in the road is quite 
apparent, you cannot go ahead. 
You MUST go one way or the other. 

For now, if you go straight ahead, the way you were going before 
you came to the branch, YOU WILL GO NOWHERE. 
The whole 
purpose of coming this far is to decide WHICH BRANCH YOU 
WILL TAKE FROM HERE ON. 
The way you came no longer mat¬ 
ters. 
IT CAN NO LONGER SERVE. 


T 22 E 2. 
No-one who reaches this far CAN make the wrong decision. 

But he CAN delay. 
And there is no part of the journey that seems 
more hopeless and futile than standing where the road branches, 
and not deciding which way to go. 
It is only the first few steps along 


735 March 11, 1968 

736 [Special Message: March 11, 1968] 


1-736 


746 



Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

the right way that seem hard, because you HAVE chosen, but you 
still think you can go back and make the other choice. 


T 22 E 3. 
This is not so. 
A choice made with the power of Heaven to 
uphold it cannot BE undone. 
Your way IS decided. 


T 22 E 4. 
There will be nothing you will NOT be told, if you acknowl¬ 
edge this. 
T(809) -628 737 

T 22 E 5. 
And so you stand, here in this holy place, before the veil of 
sin that hangs between you and the face of Christ. 
LET it be lifted! 
Raise it together, for it is but a veil that stands between you. 
Either 
alone will see it as a solid block, nor realize how thin the drapery 
that separates you now. 
Yes, 738 it IS almost over, IN YOUR 
AWARENESS. 
And peace has reached you even here, BEFORE the 
veil. 
Think what will happen after! The love of Christ will light 
YOUR faces, and shine from them into a darkened world that 
NEEDS the light. 
And, from this holy place. 
He will return with you, 
not leaving it or you. 


T 22 E 6. 
YOU will become His messengers, returning Him unto Him¬ 
self. 
Think of the loveliness that YOU will see, who walk with Him! 
And think how beautiful will each of you look to the other! How 
happy you will be to be TOGETHER, after such a long and lonely 
journey where you walked alone. 
The gates of Heaven, open now 
for you, will you now open to the sorrowful. 
And none who looks 
upon the Christ in you but will rejoice. 
How beautiful the sight you 
saw beyond the veil, which you will bring to light the tired eyes of 
those as weary now as once you were. 
How thankful will they be to 
see you come among them, offering Christ's forgiveness to dispel 
their faith in sin. 


T 22 E 7. 
Every mistake you make the other will gently have corrected 
FOR you. 
For, in his sight, your loveliness is HIS salvation, which he 
would PROTECT from harm. 
And each will be the other's strong 
protector from EVERYTHING that seems to rise between you. 
So 


737 May 24, 1967 

7,8 The Notes and Urtext have this as shown, while the HLC and FIP replace “Yes” with “Yet.” 


747 


1-737 



Volume I Text 


shall you walk the world with me, whose message has not yet been 
given everyone. 
For you are here to let it be RECEIVED. 
God's offer 
still is open; yet it waits acceptance. 
From you who have accepted it, 
is it received. 
Into your joined hands is it safely given. 
For you who 

SHARE it have become its willing guardians and protectors. 
T(810) - 
629 

T 22 E 8. 
To all who share the love of God the grace is given to be the 
givers of what they have received. 
And so they learn that it is theirs 
forever. 
All barriers disappear before their coming, as every obstacle 
was finally surmounted that seemed to rise and block THEIR way 
before. 
This veil you lift together opens the way to truth to more 
than you. 
Those who would let illusions be lifted from their minds 
are this world's Saviors, walking the world with their Redeemer, 
and carrying His message of hope and freedom and RELEASE from 
suffering to everyone who NEEDS a miracle to save him. 


T 22 E 9. 
Flow EASY is it to offer this miracle to everyone! No-one 
who has received it for himself COULD find it difficult. 
For, BY re¬ 
ceiving it, he learned it was not given him alone. 
Such is the func¬ 
tion of a holy relationship; to RECEIVE together, and give as you 
received. 
Standing BEFORE the veil, it still seems difficult. 
But hold 
out your JOINED hands and touch this heavy-seeming block, and 
you will learn how easily your fingers slip through its nothingness. 


It is no solid wall. 
And only an illusion stands between you and the 
holy Self you share. 
T(8ll) -630 739 

T 22 F. 
Weakness and Defensiveness (Notes 163111:6) 

T 22 F l. 
How does one overcome illusions? Surely not by force or 
anger. 
Nor by OPPOSING them in ANY way. 
Merely by letting rea¬ 
son tell you that they CONTRADICT reality. 
They GO AGAINST 
what must be true. 
The opposition comes from THEM, and NOT 
reality. 
Reality opposes nothing. 
What merely is, NEEDS no defense, 
and offers none. 
Only illusions need defense, BECAUSE OF WEAK¬ 
NESS. 
And how CAN it be difficult to walk the way of truth, when 


739 May 25, 1967 


1-738 


748 



Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

only WEAKNESS interferes? YOU are the strong ones in this seem¬ 
ing conflict. 
And you need NO defense. 
Everything that needs de¬ 
fense YOU DO NOT WANT. 
For anything that needs defense will 
WEAKEN you. 


T 22 F 2. 
Consider what the ego wants defenses FOR. 
ALWAYS to 
justify what GOES AGAINST the truth, flies in the face of reason, 
AND MAKES NO SENSE. 
Can this BE justified? What can this be, 
except an invitation to insanity, to save you FROM the truth? And 
what would you be SAVED from, but what you FEAR? Belief in sin 
needs GREAT defense, and at ENORMOUS cost. 
All that the Holy 
Spirit offers must be DEFENDED AGAINST, and SACRIFICED. 
For 
sin is carved into a block out of YOUR peace, and laid BETWEEN 
you and its return. 
Yet how can peace BE so fragmented? It is STILL 
whole, and NOTHING has been TAKEN FROM it. 


T 22 F 3. 
See how the means and the material of evil dreams are noth¬ 
ing! In truth, you stand together, with NOTHING in between. 
God 
holds your hands, and what can separate whom He has joined as 
one with Him? 740 It is your Father Whom you would defend against. 

Yet it remains impossible to keep Love out. 
God rests with you in 
quiet, undefended and wholly undefending. 
For in this quiet state 
alone is strength and power. 
Here can NO weakness enter, for here 
is no attack, and therefore no illusions. 
Love rests in CERTAINTY. 

Only UNcertainty can BE defensive. 
And ALL uncertainty is doubt 
about YOURSELF. 
T(812) -631 

T 22 F 4. 
How weak is fear; how little and how meaningless! How in¬ 
significant before the quiet strength of those whom Love has joined! 
This is your "enemy;" a frightened mouse which would attack the 
universe. 
How likely is it that it will SUCCEED? Can it be difficult 
to disregard its feeble squeaks that tell of its omnipotence, and 
would drown out the hymn of praise to its Creator that every heart 
throughout the universe forever sings as one? Which IS the 


7411 Matthew 19:6 “So then, they are no longer two but one flesh. 
Therefore what God has joined 
together, let not man separate.” 


749 


1-739 



Volume I Text 


stronger? Is it this tiny mouse, or everything that God created? You 
are NOT joined together by this mouse, but by the Will of God. 
And 
can a mouse BETRAY whom God has joined? 

T 22 F 5. 
If you but RECOGNIZED how little stands between you and 
your AWARENESS of your union! Be not deceived by the illusions 
it presents of size and thickness, weight, solidity, and firmness of 
foundation. 
Yes, to the body's eyes it looks like an enormous, solid 
body, immovable as is a mountain. 
Yet, within YOU, there is a force 
which NO illusions can resist. 
This body only SEEMS to be immov¬ 
able. 
This force IS irresistible in truth. 
What, then, MUST happen 
when they come together? Can the illusion of immovability be long 
defended for what is quietly PAST THROUGH, and GONE BE¬ 
YOND? 

T 22 F 6. 
Forget not, when you feel the need arise to be defensive 
about ANYTHING, you have identified YOUR SELF with an illu¬ 
sion. 
And therefore feel that you are weak, BECAUSE YOU ARE 
ALONE. 
This is the cost of ALL illusions. 
Not one but rests on the 
belief that you are separate. 
Not one that does not SEEM to stand, 
heavy and solid and unmovable, between you and your brother. 

And not one that truth can NOT pass over lightly, and so easily that 
you MUST be convinced, in spite of what you THOUGHT it was, 
that it was nothing. 
If you forgive each other, this MUST happen. 


For it IS your unwillingness to overlook what seems to stand be¬ 
tween you that makes it look impenetrable, and DEFENDS the illu¬ 
sion of its immovability. 
T(813) -632 741 

T 22 G. 
Freedom and the Holy Spirit (Notes 1635 11:10) 

T 22 G1. 
Do you want freedom of the body, or of the mind? For both 
you cannot have. 
Which do you value? Which is your goal? For one 
you see as means; the other, end. 
And one must serve the other, and 
LEAD to its predominance, increasing ITS importance by DIMIN¬ 
ISHING its own. 
Means serve the end, and as the end is reached, the 
value of the means decreases, and is eclipsed entirely when they are 


June 3,1967 


1-740 


750 



Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

recognized as functionless. 
No-one but yearns for freedom, and tries 
to find it, but he will seek for it where he believes it IS, and CAN be 
found. 
He will believe it possible of mind OR body, and he will 
make the other SERVE his choice, as means to find it. 


T 22 G 2. 
Where freedom of the BODY has been chosen, the mind is 
used as MEANS, whose value lies in its ability to contrive ways to 
achieve the body's freedom. 
Yet freedom of the body HAS no mean¬ 
ing. 
And so the mind is DEDICATED to serve illusions. 
This is a 
situation SO contradictory and SO impossible that anyone who 
chooses this has NO idea of what is valuable. 
Yet even in this confu¬ 
sion, so profound it cannot BE described, the Holy Spirit waits in 
gentle patience, as certain of the outcome as He is sure of His Crea¬ 
tor's love. 
He knows this mad decision was made by one as dear to 
His Creator as Love is to Itself. 


T 22 G 3. 
Be not disturbed at all to think how He can change the role 
of means and end so easily in what God loves, and would have free 
forever. 
But be you, rather, grateful that YOU can be the means to 
serve His end. 
This is the ONLY service which leads to freedom. 
To 
serve THIS end, the body MUST be perceived as T(814) -633 sinless, 
BECAUSE the goal is sinlessness. 
The LACK of contradiction makes 
the soft transition from means to end as easy as is the shift from hate 
to gratitude before forgiving eyes. 
You WILL be sanctified by one 
another, using your bodies ONLY to serve the sinless. 
And it will be 
IMPOSSIBLE for you to hate what serves what you would HEAL. 


T 22 G 4. 
This holy relationship, lovely in its innocence, mighty in 
strength, and blazing with a light far brighter than the sun which 
lights the sky YOU see, is chosen of your Father as a means for His 
Own plan. 
Be thankful that it serves yours not at all. 
Nothing en¬ 
trusted to it can BE misused. 
And nothing given it but WILL be 
used. 
This holy relationship has the power to heal ALL pain, RE¬ 
GARDLESS of its form. 
Neither of you alone can serve at all. 
Only in 
your JOINT will does healing lie. 
For here YOUR healing is, and 
here will YOU accept Atonement. 
And in your healing IS the Son- 
ship healed, BECAUSE your wills are joined. 



751 


1-741 


Volume I Text 


T 22 G 5. 
Before a holy relationship, there IS no sin. 
The FORM of er¬ 
ror is no longer seen. 
And reason, joined with love, looks quietly on 
ALL confusion, observing merely, "this was a mistake." And then 
the same Atonement YOU accepted in YOUR relationship, COR¬ 
RECTS the error, and lays a part of Heaven in its place. 
How blessed 
are you, who let this gift be given! Each part of Heaven that you 
bring, is given YOU. 
And every empty place in Heaven that you fill 
again with the Eternal Light YOU bring, shines now on YOU. 
The 
means of sinlessness can know no fear, because they carry ONLY 
love with them. 


T 22 G 6. 
Children of peace, the light HAS come to you. 
The light you 
bring you do NOT recognize, and yet you will remember. 
Who 
T(815) -634 can deny HIMSELF the vision that he brings to others? 

And who would fail to recognize a gift he let be laid in Heaven 
through HIMSELF? The gentle service that you give the Holy Spirit 
IS service to yourself. 
You who are now HIS means must love all 
that He loves. 
And what you bring is YOUR remembrance of every¬ 
thing that is eternal. 
No trace of anything in time can long remain in 
minds that serve the timeless. 
And NO illusion can disturb the 
peace of a relationship which has become the MEANS of peace. 


T 22 G 7. 
When you have looked upon each other with COMPLETE 
forgiveness, from which NO error is excluded and NOTHING kept 
hidden, what mistake can there be ANYWHERE you can NOT over¬ 
look? What form of suffering could BLOCK your sight, preventing 
you from seeing PAST it? And what illusion COULD there be you 
will NOT recognize as a mistake; a shadow through which you walk 
COMPLETELY undismayed? God would let NOTHING interfere 
with those whose wills are His. 
And they will RECOGNIZE their 
wills are His, BECAUSE they serve His Will. 
AND SERVE IT WILL¬ 
INGLY. 
How can it NOT be theirs? And COULD remembrance of 
what they are be long delayed? T(816) -635 742 


742 June 5, 1967 


1-742 


752 



Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

T 22 G 8. 
You will see your value through each other's eyes, and each 
one is released as he beholds his Savior IN PLACE of the attacker 
who he THOUGHT was there. 
Through this releasing is the world 
released. 
This is YOUR part in bringing peace. 
For you have asked 
what is your function here, and have been answered. 
Seek not to 
change it, nor to substitute ANOTHER goal. 
This one was GIVEN 
you, and ONLY this. 
Accept this one, and serve it willingly, for 
what the Holy Spirit does with the gifts you give each other, to 
whom He offers them, and where and when, is up to Him. 


T 22 G 9. 
He will bestow them where they are received and wel¬ 
comed. 
He will use every one of them for peace. 
Nor will one little 
smile, or willingness to overlook the tiniest mistake, be lost to any¬ 
one. 
What can it be but universal blessing to look on what your Fa¬ 
ther loves with charity? EXTENSION of forgiveness is the Holy 
Spirit's function. 
Leave this to Him. 
Let YOUR concern be only that 
you give TO Him that which can BE extended. 
Save no dark secrets 
that He cannot use. 
But offer Him the tiny gifts He can extend for¬ 
ever. 


T 22 G10. 
He will take every one, and make of it a potent force for 
peace. 
He will withhold no blessing from it, or limit it in any way. 


He will join to it ALL the power that God has given Him, to make 
each little gift of love a source of healing for everyone. 
Each little gift 
you offer to the other lights up the world. 
Be not concerned with 
darkness; look AWAY from it, and TOWARD each other. 
And let 
the darkness be dispelled by Him Who knows the light, and lays it 
gently in each gentle smile of faith and confidence with which you 
bless each other. 
T(817) -636 

T 22 G11. 
On 743 your learning depends the welfare of the world. 
And 
it is only arrogance that would DENY the power of your will. 
Think 
you the Will of God is powerLESS? Is this HUMILITY? You do not 
see what this belief has done. 
You see yourself as vulnerable, frail, 
and easily destroyed. 
And at the mercy of countless attackers more 


June 8, 1967 


753 


1-743 



Volume I Text 


powerful than you. 
Let us look straight at how this error came 
about, for here lies buried the heavy anchor that seems to keep the 
fear of God in place, unmovable and solid as a rock. 
While this re¬ 
mains, so will it seem to be. 


T 22 G 12. 
Who can attack the Son of God, and NOT attack his Father? 
How can God's Son be weak and frail and easily destroyed, 

UNLESS HIS FATHER IS? You do NOT see that EVERY sin and 
EVERY condemnation which you perceive and justify IS an attack 
upon your Father. 
And that is WHY it has not happened, nor 
COULD be real. 
You do not see that this is your attempt, BECAUSE 
you think the Father and the Son are separate. 
And you MUST think 
that they are separate, BECAUSE OF FEAR. 
For it SEEMS safer to 
attack another or yourself, than to attack the great Creator of the 
universe. 
Whose power you KNOW. 


T 22 G13. 
If you were one with Him, AND RECOGNIZED THIS 
ONENESS, you would know His power is YOURS. 
But you will 
NOT remember this, while you believe attack of ANY kind means 
ANYTHING. 
It is unjustified in ANY form, BECAUSE it has no 
meaning. 
The only way it COULD be justified is if each one of you 
were SEPARATE from the other, and all were separate from your 
Creator. 
For ONLY then would it be possible to attack a part of the 
creation WITHOUT the whole; the Son WITHOUT the Father. 
And 
to attack another, WITHOUT yourself; or hurt yourself, without the 
other feeling pain. 


T 22 G14. 
And this belief, you WANT. 
Yet wherein lies its value, EX¬ 
CEPT in the desire to attack in safety? Attack is neither safe nor 
dangerous. 
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE. 
And this is so, BECAUSE the uni¬ 
verse is one. 
You would not T(818) -637 choose attack on its reality, if 
it were not ESSENTIAL to attack to see it SEPARATE FROM ITS 
CREATOR. 
And thus it seems as if love could attack, AND BE¬ 
COME FEARFUL. 
Only the DIFFERENT can attack. 
So you con¬ 
clude, BECAUSE you can attack, you must be DIFFERENT. 
Yet does 
the Holy Spirit explain this differently. 
BECAUSE you are NOT dif¬ 
ferent, you CAN NOT ATTACK. 



1-744 


754 


Chapter 22 - Salvation and the Holy Relationship 

T 22 G 15. 
Either position is a logical conclusion, if only the different 
can attack. 
Either could be maintained, BUT NEVER BOTH. 
The 
ONLY question to be answered to decide which MUST be true, is 
WHETHER YOU ARE DIFFERENT. 
From the position of what YOU 
understand, you seem to BE. 
And THEREFORE can attack. 
Of the 
alternatives, this SEEMS more natural, and more in line with your 
experience. 
And therefore it is necessary that you have OTHER ex¬ 
periences, more in line with truth, to teach you what IS natural and 
true. 
This is the function of your holy relationship. 
For what ONE 
thinks, the OTHER will experience WITH him. 
What can this mean, 
EXCEPT your minds are one? 

T 22 G 16. 
Look not with fear upon this happy fact, and think not that 
it lays a heavy burden on you. 
For, when you have ACCEPTED it 
with gladness, you will realize that your relationship is a reflection 
of the union of the Creator and His Son. 
From loving minds, there IS 
no separation. 
And every thought in one brings gladness to the 
other, BECAUSE they are the same. 
Joy is unlimited, BECAUSE each 
shining thought of Love EXTENDS its Being, and creates more of 
Itself. 
There is no difference ANYWHERE within it. 
For every 
thought is like Itself. 


T 22 G 17. 
The light that joins you shines throughout the universe. 

And, BECAUSE it joins you, so it makes you one with your Creator. 

And, in HIM, is all creation joined. 
Would you REGRET you cannot 
fear alone, when your relationship can also teach the power of love 
is there, which makes ALL fear impossible? Do not attempt to keep 
a little of the ego with this gift. 
For it was given to be USED, and 
NOT obscured. 
What teaches you T(819) -638 744 you CANNOT sepa¬ 
rate, DENIES the ego. 
Let TRUTH decide if you be different or the 
same, and TEACH you which is true. 



744 June 12, 1967 


755 


1-745 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 

T 23 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1647 11:22) 

T 23 A l. 
Do you not see the OPPOSITE of frailty and weakness is 
sinlessness? INNOCENCE IS STRENGTH, and nothing else is 
strong. 
The sinless cannot fear. 
And fear of any kind is weakness. 

The show of strength attack would use to COVER frailty, conceals it 
not. 
For how can the unreal BE hidden? No-one is strong who has 
an enemy. 
And no-one can attack, unless he thinks he HAS. 
Belief in 
enemies is therefore the belief in WEAKNESS. 
And what is weak is 
NOT the Will of God. 
Being OPPOSED to It, it is Its "enemy." And 
God is feared, as an OPPOSING will. 


T 23 A 2. 
How strange indeed becomes this war against Yourself! You 
will believe that EVERYTHING you use for sin can hurt you, AND 
BECOME YOUR ENEMY. 
And you will fight AGAINST it, and try 
to weaken it, BECAUSE of this. 
And you will think that you suc¬ 
ceeded, and attack again. 
It is as certain you will fear what you at¬ 
tack, as it is sure that you will love what you perceive as sinless. 
He 
walks in peace who travels sinlessly along the way Love shows him. 

For Love walks WITH him there, PROTECTING him from fear. 
And 
he will see ONLY the sinless, who can NOT attack. 


T 23 A 3. 
Walk you in glory, with your head held high, and fear no 
evil. 
745 The innocent are safe, because they SHARE their inno¬ 
cence. 
746 Nothing they see is harmful, for their AWARENESS of the 
truth releases everything from the illusion of harmfulness. 
And 
what SEEMED harmful now stands shining in their innocence, re¬ 
leased from sin and fear, and happily returned to love. 
They share 
the strength of love BECAUSE they looked on innocence. 
And every 


745 The Urtext manuscript has a comma here, but all other versions make it a period, including the 
Notes. 


746 Psalm 23:4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, 

I will fear no evil; 

For You are with me; 

Your rod and Your staff, they comfort me. 



1-746 


756 



Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


error disappeared, because they saw it not. 
Who looks for glory 

finds it where it IS. 
Where COULD it be, but in the innocent? T(820) - 
639 

T 23 A 4. 
Let not the little interferers pull you to littleness. 
There CAN 
be no attraction of guilt in innocence. 
Think what a happy world 
you walk, with truth beside you! Do not give up this world of free¬ 
dom, for a little sigh of seeming sin, nor for a tiny stirring of guilt's 
attraction. 
Would you, for all these meaningless distractions, lay 
Heaven aside? Your destiny and purpose are far beyond them, in 
the clean peace where littleness does not exist. 
Your purpose is at 
variance with littleness of any kind. 
And so it is at variance with sin. 


T 23 A 5. 
Let us not let littleness lead God's Son into temptation. 
747 His 
glory is BEYOND it, measureless and timeless is as Eternity. 
Do not 
let time intrude upon your sight of him. 
Leave him not frightened 
and alone in his temptation. 
But help him rise above it, and perceive 
the light of which he is a part. 
YOUR innocence will light the way to 
his, and so is YOURS protected, and KEPT in your awareness. 
For 
who can know his glory, and perceive the little and the weak about 
him? Who can walk trembling in a fearful world, and realize that 
Heaven's glory shines in him? 

T 23 A 6. 
Nothing around you but is PART of you. 
Look on it lov¬ 
ingly, and see the light of Heaven in it. 
So will you come to under¬ 
stand all that is given you. 
In kind forgiveness will the world spar¬ 
kle and shine, and everything you once thought sinful now will be 
re-interpreted as part of Heaven. 
How beautiful it is to walk, clean 
and redeemed and happy, through a world in bitter need of the re¬ 
demption that your innocence bestows upon it! 748 What can you 
value MORE than this? For here is YOUR salvation and YOUR free- 


747 Matthew 6:13 “And do not lead us into temptation, 

But deliver us from the evil one. 


For Yours is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever.” Amen. 


748 The Urtext manuscript does not have an exclamation point here, just a period. 
However, both the 
Notes and the HLC do have an exclamation point, suggesting it was omitted in error. 



757 


1-747 



Volume I Text 


dom. 
And it MUST be complete, if YOU would recognize it. 
T(82l) - 
640 749 

T 23 B. 
The Irreconcilable Beliefs (Notes 1652 11:27) 

T 23 B 1 . 
The memory of God comes to the quiet mind. 
It CANNOT 
come where there is conflict, for a mind at war against itself remem¬ 
bers not Eternal Gentleness. 
The means of war are NOT the means 
of peace. 
And what the warlike would remember is NOT love. 
War 
is impossible unless belief in VICTORY is cherished. 
Conflict 
WITHIN you MUST imply that you believe the ego has the power 
TO BE VICTORIOUS. 
Why else would you identify with it? Surely 
you realize the ego IS at war with God. 
Certain it is it HAS no en¬ 
emy. 
But just as certain is its fixed belief it has an enemy that it 
MUST overcome, and WILL SUCCEED. 


T 23 B 2. 
Do you not realize a war against yourself would BE a war on 
God? Is victory CONCEIVABLE? And, if it were, is this a victory 
that you would WANT? The death of God, if it were possible, 
would be YOUR death. 
Is this a VICTORY? The ego ALWAYS 
marches to defeat, BECAUSE it thinks that triumph over you is pos¬ 
sible. 
And God thinks otherwise. 
This is no war. 
Only the mad belief 
the Will of God can be attacked and overthrown. 
You may IDEN¬ 
TIFY with this belief, but never will it be more than madness. 
And 
fear will reign in madness, and will SEEM to have replaced love 
there. 
This is the conflict's PURPOSE. 
And to those who think that it 
is possible, the means seem real. 


T 23 B 3. 
Be certain that it is impossible God and the ego, or yourself 
and it, will EVER meet. 
You SEEM to meet, and make your strange 
alliances, on grounds that have no meaning. 
For your beliefs con¬ 
verge upon the body, the ego's chosen home, which you believe is 
YOURS. 
You meet at a mistake; 750 - an error in your self-appraisal. 



’June 20, 1967 



—- 

Cl .. 






snapshot from Notes (Notes 11:27) This is a 
most unusual punctuation, a semicolon followed by an em dash. 
The Notes doesn’t have a semicolon. 

It’s rather difficult to say just what it has. 
This could be a semicolon crossed out, followed by a comma 


PROOF 758 COPY 






Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


The ego joins with an ILLUSION of yourself you SHARE with it. 

And yet, illusions cannot join. 
They ARE the same, and they are 
nothing. 
Their joining lies in nothingness; T(822) -641 two are as 
meaningless as one, or as a thousand. 
The ego joins with nothing, 
BEING nothing. 
The victory it seeks is meaningless as is itself. 


T 23 B 4. 
Brothers, the war against yourself is almost over. 
The jour¬ 
ney's end is at the place of peace. 
Would you not now ACCEPT the 
peace offered you here? This enemy you fought as an INTRUDER 
on your peace is here transformed before your sight into the GIVER 
of your peace. 
Your "enemy" was God Himself, to Whom all con¬ 
flict, triumph, and attack of ANY kind are all unknown. 
He loves 
you perfectly, completely, and eternally. 
The Son of God at war with 
his Creator is a condition as ridiculous as nature roaring at the wind 
in anger, and proclaiming that it is part of itself no longer. 


T 23 B 5. 
Could nature possibly ESTABLISH this, and make it true? 
Nor IS it up to you to say what shall be part of you, and what is kept 
apart. 
The war against yourself was undertaken to teach the Son of 
God that he is NOT himself, and NOT his Father's Son. 
For this, the 
memory of his Father MUST be forgotten. 
It IS forgotten in the 
body's life, and, if you think you ARE a body, you will believe you 
HAVE forgotten it. 
But truth can never be forgotten by ITSELF. 
And 
you have NOT forgotten what you are. 
Only a strange illusion of 
yourself, a wish to triumph OVER what you are, remembers not. 


T 23 B 6. 
The war against yourself is but the battle of two illusions, 
struggling to make them DIFFERENT from each other, in the belief 
the one which conquers will be true. 
There IS no conflict between 
them and the TRUTH. 
Nor ARE they different from each other. 
Both 
are NOT true. 
And so it matters not what form they take. 
What 
made them is insane, and they remain part of what made them. 

Madness holds out no menace to reality, and has no influence upon 
it. 
Illusions CANNOT triumph over truth, nor can they T(823) -642 


and the “=“ equal sign is ambiguous in meaning here. 
Probably a simple comma or dash would suffice 
here. 



759 


1-749 



Volume I Text 


threaten it in any way. 
And the reality which they deny is NOT a 
part of them. 


T 23 B 7. 
What YOU remember IS a part of you. 
For you MUST be as 
God created you. 
Truth does not fight against illusion, nor do illu¬ 
sions fight against the truth. 
Illusions battle ONLY with themselves. 

Being fragmented, they fragment. 
But truth is indivisible, and FAR 
beyond their little reach. 
You will remember what you know when 
you have learned you CANNOT be in conflict. 
One ILLUSION 
about yourself can battle with another, yet the war of two illusions 
is a state where NOTFilNG HAPPENS. 
There is no victor, and there 
is no victory. 
And truth stands radiant, APART from conflict, un¬ 
touched and quiet, in the peace of God. 


T 23 B 8. 
Conflict must be between two FORCES. 
It can NOT exist be¬ 
tween one power and nothingness. 
There is nothing you COULD 
attack that is not part of you. 
And, BY attacking it, you make two 
illusions of yourself, IN CONFLICT with each other. 
And this oc¬ 
curs whenever you look on ANYTFIING that God created with any¬ 
thing but love. 
Conflict is fearful, for it is the birth of fear. 
Yet what 
is born of nothing cannot WIN reality through battle. 
Why would 
you fill your world with conflicts with yourself? Let all this madness 
be undone for you, and turn in peace to the remembrance of God, 
still shining in your quiet mind. 


T 23 B 9. 
See how the conflict of illusions disappears, when it is 
brought to truth! For it seems real ONLY as long as it is seen as war 
between CONFLICTING truths, the conqueror to be the truer, the 
MORE real, the VANQUISHER of the illusion that was less real, 
MADE an illusion by defeat. 
For conflict is the choice BETWEEN 
illusions, one to be crowned as real, the other vanquished and de¬ 
spised. 
Fiere will the Father NEVER be remembered. 
Yet NO illu¬ 
sion can invade His home, and drive Him out of what Fie loves for¬ 
ever. 
And what Fie loves MUST be forever quiet and at peace, BE¬ 
CAUSE it T(824) -643 is Fiis home. 
And you who are beloved of Flim 
are no illusions, being as true and holy as Himself. 



1-750 


760 


Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


T 23 B 10 . 
The stillness of your certainty of Him and of yourself is 
home to both of you, who dwell as one, and NOT apart. 
Open the 
doors of His most holy home, and let forgiveness sweep away all 
trace of the belief in sin that keeps God homeless, and His Son with 
Him. 
You are not strangers in the house of God. 
Welcome your 
brother to the home where God has set him in serenity and peace, 
and dwells with him. 
Illusions have no place where Love abides, 
protecting you from EVERYTHING that is not true. 
You dwell in 
peace as limitless as its Creator. 
And EVERYTHING is given those 
who would remember Him. 


T 23 B ll. 
Over His home the Holy Spirit watches, sure that its peace 
can never BE disturbed. 
How can the resting place of God turn on 
itself, and seek to overcome the One Who dwells there? And think 
what happens when the house of God perceives itself divided. 
751 
The altar disappears, the light grows dim, the temple of the Holy 
One becomes a house of sin. 
752 And nothing is remembered, EX¬ 
CEPT illusions. 
Illusions CAN conflict, because their forms ARE dif¬ 
ferent. 
And they do battle ONLY to establish which FORM is true. 


T 23 B 12. 
Illusion meets illusion; truth, itself. 
The meeting of illusions 
leads to war. 
Peace looking on itself EXTENDS itself. 
War is the 
condition in which fear is born, and grows and seeks to dominate. 

Peace is the state where love abides, and seeks to share itself. 
Con¬ 
flict and peace are opposites; where one abides, the other CANNOT 
be; where either goes, the other disappears. 
So is the memory of God 
obscured in minds that have become illusion's battleground. 
Yet far 


751 Matthew 12:25 But Jesus knew their thoughts, and said to them: “Every kingdom divided against 
itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.” 

7:12 Psalm 16:10 For You will not leave my soul in Sheol, Nor will You allow Your Holy One to see 
corruption. 


Jeremiah 7:11 Has this house, which is called by My name, become a den of thieves in your eyes? 
Behold, I, even I, have seen it,” says the LORD. 


Mark 1:24 Saying, “Let us alone! What have we to do with You, Jesus of Nazareth? Did You come to 
destroy us? I know who You are—the Holy One of God!” 

Matthew 21:13 And He said to them, “It is written, “My house shall be called a house of prayer,’ but 
you have made it a “den of thieves.”’ 


761 


1-751 



Volume I Text 


beyond this senseless war it shines, ready to BE remembered when 
you side with peace. 
T(825) -644 753 

T 23 C. 
The Laws of Chaos (Notes 1660 11:35) 

T 23 C 1 The "laws of chaos" CAN be brought to light, though 
NEVER understood. 
Chaotic laws are hardly meaningful, and there¬ 
fore out of reason's sphere. 
Yet they APPEAR to constitute an obsta¬ 
cle to reason and to truth. 
Let us, then, look upon them calmly, that 
we may look BEYOND them, understanding what they ARE, NOT 
what they would maintain. 
It IS essential it be understood what they 
are FOR, because it is their PURPOSE to make meaningless, and to 
ATTACK the truth. 
Here are the laws that rule the world you made. 

And yet they govern nothing, and need NOT be broken; merely 
looked upon and gone beyond. 


T 23 C 2 The first chaotic law is that the truth is different for every¬ 
one. 
Like all these principles, this one maintains that each is sepa¬ 
rate, and has a different set of thoughts which SETS HIM OFF from 
others. 
This principle evolves from the belief there is a hierarchy of 
illusions; some are MORE valuable, and THEREFORE true. 
And 
each establishes this FOR HIMSELF, and MAKES it true by his at¬ 
tack on what another values. 
This is justified BECAUSE the values 
differ. 
And those who hold them SEEM to be unlike, and THERE¬ 
FORE enemies. 


T 23 C 3 Think how this SEEMS to interfere with the first principle of 
miracles. 
For this establishes degrees of TRUTH among illusions, 
making it appear that some are HARDER to be overcome than oth¬ 
ers. 
If it were realized that they are all the same and EQUALLY un¬ 
true, it would be easy, then, to understand that miracles apply to 
ALL of them. 
Errors of ANY kind can be corrected, BECAUSE they 
are untrue. 
When brought to truth, instead of TO EACH OTHER, 
they merely disappear. 
No PART of nothing CAN be more resistant 
to the truth than can another. 
T(826) -645 


June 28, 1967 


1-752 


762 



Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


T 23 C 4 The second law of chaos, dear indeed to every worshipper 
of sin, is that each one MUST sin, and therefore DESERVES attack 
and death. 
This principle, closely related to the first, is the demand 
that errors call for punishment, and NOT correction. 
For the DE¬ 
STRUCTION of the one who makes the error places him BEYOND 
correction, and beyond forgiveness. 
What he has done is thus inter¬ 
preted as an irrevocable sentence on himself, which God Himself is 
powerless to overlook. 
Sin cannot BE remitted, being the belief the 
Son of God can make mistakes for which his own destruction be¬ 
comes inevitable. 
754 

T 23 C 5 Think what this SEEMS to do to the relationship between 
the Father and the Son. 
Now it appears that they can NEVER be One 
again. 
For One must ALWAYS be condemned, AND BY THE 
OTHER. 
Now are they different, and ENEMIES. 
And THEIR rela¬ 
tionship is one of opposition, just as the separate aspects of the Son 
meet ONLY to conflict, but NOT to join. 
One becomes weak, the 
other strong BY HIS DEFEAT. 
And fear of God, and of each other, 
now appears as sensible, made real by what the Son of God has 
done, both to himself AND his Creator. 


T 23 C 6 The arrogance on which the laws of chaos stand could not 
be more apparent than emerges here. 
Here is a principle which 
would define what the CREATOR of reality must be; what He 
MUST think, and what He must believe; and how He must RE¬ 
SPOND, believing it. 
It is not seen as even necessary that He be 
asked about the truth of what has been established for His belief. 



‘ Matthew 26:28 “For this is My blood of the new covenant, which is shed for many for the remission 
of sins.” 

Acts 2:38 Then Peter said to them, “Repent, and let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus 
Christ for the remission of sins; and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.” 

This is another instance of ACIM “correcting” a commonly held view of Biblical teaching, this one 
relating to the nature of sin and its reality. 
Is the consequence of “mistakes” the destruction of the 
mistaken Son of God or is the consequence of mistakes but the illusion of separation in which it seems 
as if sin and guilt are real? In either view the objective is release. 
The question here is whether the 
release is from the illusion of sin and the consequent illusions of guilt and punishment, or from the 
reality of God’s damnation of the mistaken Son. 
ACIM says sin and guilt are illusions we made up. 

Some interpreters of the Bible view sin as reality, along with divine punishment for it. 



763 


1-753 



Volume I Text 


His Son can TELL Him this, and He has but the choice whether to 
take his word for it, or be mistaken. 


T 23 C 7 This leads directly to the third preposterous belief that 
seems to make chaos eternal. 
For, if God cannot BE mistaken, then 
He must accept His Son's belief in what he is, and HATE him for it. 

See how the fear of God is REINFORCED by this third principle. 

Now it becomes IMPOSSIBLE to turn to Him for help in misery. 
For 
now He has become the "enemy" Who "caused" it, and to Whom 
appeal is useless. 
Nor can salvation lie within the Son, T(827) -646 
whose every aspect seems to be at war with Him, 755 and JUSTIFIED 
in its attack. 


T 23 C 8 And now is conflict made inevitable, and beyond the help of 
God. 
And now salvation MUST remain impossible, because the Sav¬ 
ior HAS become the enemy. 
There can be NO release and NO es¬ 
cape. 
Atonement thus becomes a myth, and vengeance, NOT for¬ 
giveness, is the Will of God. 
From where all this begins, there IS no 
sight of help that can succeed. 
ONLY destruction can BE the out¬ 
come. 
And God Himself SEEMS to be siding with it, to overcome 
His Son. 
Think not the ego will enable you to find ESCAPE from 
what it wants. 
THAT is the function of this course, which does NOT 
value what the ego cherishes. 
T(828) -647 756 

T 23 C 9 The ego values only what it TAKES. 
This leads to the fourth 
law of chaos which, if the others are accepted, MUST be true. 
This 
seeming law is the belief you HAVE what you have taken. 
By this, 
another's loss becomes your gain, and thus it fails to recognize that 
you can never "take away" save from YOURSELF. 
Yet all the other 
laws must lead to this. 
For enemies do NOT give willingly to one 
another, nor would they seek to SHARE the things they value. 
And 
what your ENEMIES would keep from you must BE worth having, 
just BECAUSE they keep it hidden from your sight. 



755 The Urtext does not capitalize “him” here although the HLC and FIP both do. 
Since the pronoun 
rather clearly refers to God, capitalization does seem to be consistent with Schucman’s style 
conventions and its omission appears to be inadvertent. 


756 June 29, 1967 


1-754 


764 



Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


T 23 C 10 All of the mechanisms of madness are seen emerging here. 

The "enemy," made strong by keeping hidden the valuable inheri¬ 
tance which should be yours; your JUSTIFIED possession, and at¬ 
tack for what has been withheld; and the inevitable loss the enemy 
MUST suffer, to save YOURSELF. 
Thus do the guilty ones protest 
their innocence. 
Were they not forced into this foul attack by the un¬ 
scrupulous behavior of the enemy, they would respond with only 
kindness. 
But, in a savage world, the kind cannot survive. 
So they 
MUST take, or else be taken FROM. 


T 23 C 11 And now there is a vague, unanswered question, not yet 
"explained." What IS this precious thing, this priceless pearl, this 
hidden secret treasure, to be wrested in righteous wrath from this 
most treacherous and cunning enemy? 757 It must be what you want, 
and never found. 
And now you "understand" the reason WFIY you 
found it not. 
For it was TAKEN from you by the enemy, and hidden 
where you would not think to look. 
He hid it in his BODY, making 

it the cover for his guilt; the hiding place for what belongs to YOU. 

T(829)-648 

T 23 C 12 Now must his body be destroyed and sacrificed, that you 
may have that which BELONGS to you. 
His treachery DEMANDS 
his death, that YOU may live. 
And you attack only in self defense. 

But what is it you want, that NEEDS his death? Can you be sure 
your murderous attack IS justified, unless you know what it is FOR? 
And here a final principle of chaos comes to the "rescue." It holds 
there is a SUBSTITUTE for love. 
This is the "magic" that will cure all 
of your pain; the missing factor in your madness THAT MAKES IT 
SANE. 
THIS is the reason why you must attack. 
HERE is what 
makes your vengeance justified. 


T 23 C 13 Behold, unveiled, the ego's secret gift, torn from your 
brother's body; hidden there in malice and in hatred for the one to 
whom the gift belongs. 
HE would deprive you of the secret ingredi¬ 
ent which would give meaning to your life. 
The substitute for love. 



07 Matthew 13:46 “who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had and 
bought it.” 


765 


1-755 



Volume I Text 


born of your enmity to one another, MUST be salvation. 
IT has no 
substitute, and there IS only one. 
And ALL relationships have but 
the purpose of seizing it, and making it your own. 
Never is your 
possession made complete. 
And never will your brother cease his 
own attack on YOU, for what you stole. 
Nor will God end His 
vengeance upon both, for, in His madness, HE must have this sub¬ 
stitute for love, and kill you both. 


T 23 C 14 You who believe you walk in sanity, with feet on solid 
ground, and through a world where meaning CAN be found, con¬ 
sider this: These ARE the laws on which your "sanity" appears to 
rest. 
These ARE the principles which makes the ground beneath 
your feet seem solid. 
And it IS here you look for meaning. 
These are 
the laws YOU made for your salvation. 
They hold in place the sub¬ 
stitute for Heaven that you prefer. 
This is their PURPOSE; they were 
MADE for this. 
There is no point in asking what they T(830) -649 758 
mean. 
This is apparent. 
The MEANS of madness MUST be insane. 

Are you as certain that you realize the GOAL is madness? 

T 23 C 15 NO-ONE wants madness, nor does anyone cling to his 
madness if he sees that this is what it IS. 
What PROTECTS madness 
is the belief THAT IT IS TRUE. 
It is the FUNCTION of insanity to 
TAKE THE PLACE of truth. 
It must be seen AS truth, to be believed. 

And, if it IS the truth, then must its opposite, which was the truth 
before, be madness now. 
Such a reversal, COMPLETELY turned 
around, with madness sanity, illusions true, attack a kindness, ha¬ 
tred love, and murder benediction, IS the goal the laws of chaos 
serve. 
These are the means by which the laws of God APPEAR to be 
reversed. 
Here do the laws of sin APPEAR to hold love captive, and 
let sin go free. 


T 23 C 16 These do not SEEM to be the goals 759 of chaos. 
For, by the 
great reversal, they appear to be the laws of ORDER. 
How could it 
NOT be so? Chaos is lawlessness, and HAS no laws. 
To be believed. 



758 June 30, 1967 

759 Notes has “laws” instead of “goals” 


1-756 


766 



Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


its SEEMING laws must be perceived as REAL. 
Their goal of mad¬ 
ness MUST be seen as sanity. 
And fear, with ashen lips and sightless 
eyes, blinded and terrible to look upon, is lifted to the throne of 
love, its dying conqueror, its substitute, the savior from salvation. 

How lovely do the laws of fear make death appear! Give thanks 
unto the hero on love's throne, who saved the Son of God for fear 
and death! 

T 23 C 17 And yet, how can it be that laws like these can BE believed? 
There is a strange device that makes this possible. 
Nor is it unfamil¬ 
iar; we have seen how it APPEARS to function many times before. 


In truth, it does NOT function, yet in dreams, where ONLY shad¬ 
ows play the major roles, it seems most powerful. 
No law of chaos 
COULD compel belief, but for the emphasis on form, AND DISRE¬ 
GARD OF CONTENT. 
No-one who thinks that one of them is true 
SEES WHAT IT SAYS. 
Some FORMS it takes seem T(83l) -650 to have 
meaning, and that is all. 


T 23 C 18 How can some FORMS of murder NOT mean death? Can 
an attack in ANY form be love? What FORM of condemnation is a 
blessing? Who makes his Savior powerless, and FINDS salvation? 
Let not the FORM of the attack on him deceive you. 
You CANNOT 
seek to harm him, and be saved. 
Who can find SAFETY from attack 
by turning on himself? How can it matter what the FORM this mad¬ 
ness takes? It is a judgment that defeats ITSELF, condemning what it 
says it wants to save. 
Be not deceived when madness takes a form 
you think is lovely. 
What is intent on your destruction, is NOT your 
friend. 


T 23 C 19 You would maintain, and think it true, that you do NOT 
believe such senseless laws, nor act upon them. 
And, when you look 
at what they SAY, they CANNOT be believed. 
Brothers, you DO 
believe them. 
For how else could you PERCEIVE the form they take, 
with content such as this? Can ANY form of this be tenable? Yet you 
believe them FOR the forms they take, and DO NOT RECOGNIZE 
the content. 
IT never changes. 
Can you paint rosy lips upon a skele- 


767 


1-757 


Volume I Text 


ton, dress it in loveliness, pet it and pamper it, AND MAKE IT 
LIVE? And can you be content with an illusion that YOU are living? 
T 23 C 20 There IS no life outside of Heaven. 
Where God created life, 
there life must be. 
In ANY state apart from Heaven, life is illusion. 

At best, it SEEMS like life; at worst, like death. 
Yet both are judg¬ 
ments on what is NOT life, equal in their inaccuracy and lack of 
meaning. 
Life not in Heaven is impossible, and what is NOT in 
Heaven is not ANYWHERE. 
Outside of Heaven, only the conflict of 
illusions stands; senseless, impossible, and beyond ALL reason, and 
yet perceived as an eternal BARRIER to Heaven. 
Illusions ARE but 
forms. 
Their content is NEVER true. 
T(832) -651 
T 23 C 21 The laws of chaos govern ALL illusions. 
Their forms con¬ 
flict, making it SEEM quite possible to value some above the others. 

Yet each one rests as surely on the belief the laws of chaos ARE the 
laws of order, as do the others. 
Each one upholds these laws com¬ 
pletely, offering a certain witness that these laws are true. 
The seem¬ 
ing gentler FORM of the attack is no less certain in its witnessing, 
OR ITS RESULTS. 
Certain it is illusions will bring fear, because of 
the beliefs that they imply, NOT for their form. 
And lack of faith in 
love, in ANY form, attests to chaos AS REALITY. 


T 23 C 22 From the belief in sin, the faith in chaos MUST follow. 
It is 
BECAUSE it follows that it seems to be a logical conclusion; a valid 
step in ordered thought. 
The steps to chaos DO follow neatly from 
their starting-point. 
Each is a different form in the progression of 
truth's reversal, leading still deeper into terror, and AWAY from 
truth. 
Think not one step is smaller than another, nor that return 
from one is easier. 
The whole descent from Heaven lies in each one. 

And where your thinking starts, there must it end. 


T 23 C 23 Brothers, take not one step in the descent to hell. 
For, HAV¬ 
ING taken one, you will NOT RECOGNIZE the rest for what they 
are. 
And they WILL follow. 
Attack in ANY form has placed your 
foot upon the twisted stairway that leads FROM Heaven. 
Yet, any 
instant, it is possible to have this all undone. 
How can you know 
whether you chose the stairs to Heaven or the way to hell? Quite 


1-758 


768 


Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


easily. 
What do you feel? Is peace in your awareness? Are you CER¬ 
TAIN which way you go? And are you sure the goal of Heaven 
CAN be reached? If not, you walk alone. 
Ask, then, your Friend to 
JOIN with you, and GIVE you certainty of where you go. 
T(833) - 
652 760 

T 23 D, Salvation Without Compromise (Notes 1674 11:49) 

T 23 D l. 
Is it not true you do NOT recognize some of the forms attack 
can take? If it is true attack in ANY form will hurt you, and will do 
so just as much as in another form which you DO recognize, then it 
MUST follow that you do not always RECOGNIZE the source of 
pain. 
ATTACK IN ANY FORM IS EQUALLY DESTRUCTIVE. 
Its 
PURPOSE does not change. 
Its sole intent is murder, and what 
FORM of murder serves to cover the massive guilt and frantic fear 
of punishment the murderer MUST feel? He may deny he IS a mur¬ 
derer, and justify his savagery with smiles as he attacks. 


T 23 D 2. 
Yet he will suffer, and will look on his intent in nightmares, 
where the smiles are gone, and where the purpose rises to meet his 
horrified awareness, and pursue him still. 
For no-one THINKS of 
murder, and escapes the guilt the thought entails. 
If the INTENT is 
death, what matter the form it takes? Is death in ANY form, how¬ 
ever lovely and charitable it may SEEM to be, a blessing and a sign 
the Voice for God speaks through you to your brother? The wrap¬ 
ping does not make the gift you give. 
An empty box, however beau¬ 
tiful and gently given, still contains nothing, and neither the receiver 
NOR THE GIVER is long deceived. 
WITHHOLD forgiveness from 
your brother, and you ATTACK him. 
You GIVE him nothing, and 
receive of him but what you gave. 


T 23 D 3. 
Salvation is no compromise of any kind. 
To compromise is 
to accept but PART of what you want; to take a little; and GIVE UP 
the rest. 
Salvation gives up nothing. 
It is complete for everyone. 
Let 
the IDEA of compromise but enter, and the awareness of salvation's 
PURPOSE is lost, because it is not recognized. 
It is DENIED where 


760 JulylO, 1967 


769 


1-759 



Volume I Text 


compromise has been accepted. 
For compromise is the belief SAL¬ 
VATION is impossible. 
It would maintain you can attack a little, 
love a little, AND KNOW THE DIFFERENCE. 
Thus it would T(834) - 
653 teach a little of the same can still be different, and yet the same 
remain intact, as one. 
Does this make sense? Can it BE understood? 

T 23 D 4. 
This course is easy just BECAUSE it makes no compromise. 

Yet it SEEMS difficult to those who still believe that compromise is 
possible. 
They do NOT see that, if it is, SALVATION IS ATTACK. 

Yet it is certain the belief that salvation is impossible can NOT up¬ 
hold a quiet, calm assurance it has come. 
Forgiveness cannot BE 
withheld a little. 
Nor is it possible to attack for this and love for that, 
and UNDERSTAND forgiveness. 
Would you not WANT to recog¬ 
nize assault upon your peace in ANY form, if only thus does it be¬ 
come impossible that YOU lose sight of it? It CAN be kept shining 
before your vision, forever clear and NEVER out of sight, if YOU 
defend it not. 


T 23 D 5. 
Those who believe that peace can BE defended, and that at¬ 
tack is JUSTIFIED on its behalf, can NOT perceive it lies within 
them. 
How COULD they know? Could they ACCEPT forgiveness 
side by side with the belief that murder takes some forms by which 
their peace is SAVED? Would they be WILLING to accept the fact 
their savage purpose is directed against themselves? No-one unites 
with enemies, nor is at one with them in purpose. 
And no-one 
COMPROMISES with an enemy but hates him still, for what he 
KEPT from him. 
Mistake not truce for peace, nor compromise for 
the ESCAPE from conflict. 


T 23 D 6. 
To be RELEASED from conflict means that IT IS OVER. 
The 
door is open; you have LEFT the battleground. 
You have NOT lin¬ 
gered there in cowering hope, because the guns are stilled an instant 
and the fear that haunts the place of death is not apparent, that it 
will not return. 
There IS no safety in a battleground. 
You can look 
down on it in safety from above, and NOT be touched. 
But, from 
within it, you can find NO safety. 
Not one tree left standing still will 
shelter you. 
Not one illusion of protection stands against the faith in 


1-760 


770 


Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


murder. 
Here stands the body, torn between T(835) -654 the natural 
desire to communicate, and the unnatural intent to murder and to 
die. 


T 23 D 7. 
Think you the FORM that murder takes can offer safety? 

Can guilt be ABSENT from a battlefield? Do not remain in conflict, 
for there IS no war without attack. 


T 23 E. 
The Fear of Life (Notes 1678 11:52) 

T 23 E l. 
The fear of God is fear of life, and NOT of death. 
Yet He re¬ 
mains the only place of safety. 
In Him is no attack, and no illusion in 
any form stalks Heaven. 
Heaven is WHOLLY true. 
No difference 
enters. 
And what is ALL the same cannot conflict. 
You are NOT 
asked to fight AGAINST your wish to murder. 
But you ARE asked 
to realize the FORM it takes conceals the SAME intent. 
And it is 
THIS you fear, and NOT the form. 


T 23 E 2. 
What is NOT love IS murder. 
What is not loving MUST be 
an attack. 
EVERY illusion is an assault on truth. 
And every one does 
violence to the IDEA of love, because it SEEMS to be of equal truth. 

What can be EQUAL to the truth, yet different? Murder and love are 
incompatible. 
Yet, if they BOTH are true, then must they be the 
SAME, and indistinguishable from one another. 
So WILL they be, to 
those who see God's Son a body. 
For it is NOT the body that is like 
the Son's Creator. 
And what is lifeless cannot BE the Son of Life. 


T 23 E 3. 
How can a body be extended to hold the universe? Can IT 
create, and BE what it creates? And can it offer its creation ALL that 
it is, and NEVER suffer loss? God does not share His function with a 
body. 
He GAVE the function to create unto His Son, BECAUSE it is 
His Own. 
It is NOT sinful to believe the function of the Son is mur¬ 
der. 
But it IS insanity. 
What is the same can HAVE no different func¬ 
tion. 
Creation is the means for God's extension. 
And what is His 
MUST be His Son's as well. 
Either the Father AND the Son are mur¬ 
derers, or neither is. 
Life makes not death, creating like itself. 
T(836) - 
655 


771 


1-761 


Volume I Text 


T 23 E 4. 
The lovely light of your relationship IS like the love of God. 


It cannot yet assume the holy function God gave His Son, for your 
forgiveness of one another is not complete as yet. 
And so it cannot 
be extended to ALL creation. 
Each form of murder and attack that 
still attracts you, and that you do not recognize for what it is, limits 
the healing and the miracles you HAVE the power to extend to all. 

Yet does the Holy Spirit understand how to increase your little gifts, 
and make them mighty. 
Also He understands how your relationship 
is raised ABOVE the battleground, IN it no more. 


T 23 E 5. 
This is your part; to realize that murder, in ANY form, is 
NOT your will. 
The OVERLOOKING of the battleground is now 
your purpose. 
Be lifted up, and from a higher place, look down 
upon it. 
From there, will your perspective be quite different. 
Here, 
in the midst of it, it DOES seem real. 
Here you have CHOSEN to be 
part of it. 
Here murder IS your choice. 
Yet, from above, the choice is 
miracles, INSTEAD of murder. 
And the perspective COMING 
FROM this choice shows you the battle is NOT real, and easily es¬ 
caped. 
Bodies may battle, but the clash of forms is meaningless. 
And 
it IS over, when you realize it never was begun. 


T 23 E 6. 
How can a battle be perceived as nothingness, when you 
ENGAGE in it? How can the truth of miracles be RECOGNIZED, if 
murder is your choice? When the temptation to attack rises to make 
your mind darkened and murderous, remember you CAN see the 
battle from above. 
Even in forms you do NOT recognize, the signs 
you know. 
There is a stab of pain, a twinge of guilt, and, above all, a 
LOSS OF PEACE. 
This you know well. 
When it occurs, leave not 
your place on high, but quickly choose a miracle INSTEAD of mur¬ 
der. 
And God Himself and all the lights of Heaven, will gently lean 
to you, and hold you up. 
For you have chosen to remain where He 
would have you. 
And NO illusion can attack the peace of God TO¬ 
GETHER with His Son. 
T(837) -656 

T 23 E 7. 
See no-one from the battleground, for there you look on him 
from nowhere. 
You have NO reference point from where to look, 
where meaning can be given what you see. 
For only bodies COULD 


1-762 


772 


Chapter 23 - The War Against Yourself 


attack and murder, and if this is your purpose, then you MUST be 
one with them. 
Only a PURPOSE unifies, and those who share a 
purpose have a mind as one . 
761 The body HAS no purpose of itself, 
and MUST be solitary. 
From below, it cannot BE surmounted. 
From 
above, the limits it exerts on those in battle still, are gone and NOT 
perceived. 
The body stands between the Father and the Heaven He 
created for His Son. 
BECAUSE it has no purpose. 


T 23 E 8. 
Think what is given those who share their Father's purpose, 
and who KNOW that it is theirs! They want for nothing. 
Sorrow of 
any kind is inconceivable. 
Only the Light they love is in awareness, 
and only Love shines upon them forever. 
It is their past, their pre¬ 
sent, and their future. 
Always the same, eternally complete, and 
wholly shared. 
They KNOW it is impossible their happiness could 
EVER suffer change of any kind. 
Perhaps you think the battle¬ 
ground CAN offer something that you can win. 
CAN it be anything 
that offers you a perfect calmness, and a sense of love so deep and 
quiet that no touch of doubt can EVER mar your certainty? And that 
will last forever? 

T 23 E 9. 
Those with the strength of God in their awareness could 
never THINK of battle. 
What COULD they gain but LOSS of their 
perfection? For everything fought for on the battleground is of the 
body; something it seems to offer or to own. 
No-one who knows 
that he has everything could seek for limitation, nor COULD he 
value the body's offerings. 
The senselessness of conquest is quite 
apparent from the quiet sphere above the battleground. 
What can 
conflict with everything? And what is there that offers LESS yet 
could be wanted MORE? Who, with the love of God upholding him, 
could find the choice of miracles or murder hard to make? T(838) - 
657 762 


761 Philippians 2:2 Fulfill my joy by being like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of 
one mind. 


762 July 17, 1967 


773 


1-763 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 

T 24 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1684 11:59) 

T 24 A1. 
Forget not that the motivation for this course is the attain¬ 
ment and the KEEPING of the state of peace. 
Given this state, the 
mind is quiet, and the condition in which God is remembered is at¬ 
tained. 
It is not necessary to tell Him what to do. 
He will not fail. 

Where He can enter, there He is already. 
And can it be He can NOT 
enter where He wills to be? Peace will be yours BECAUSE it is His 
Will. 
Can you believe a shadow can hold back the Will that holds 
the universe secure? God does not wait upon illusions to let Him be 
Himself. 
No more His Son. 
They ARE. 
And what illusion that idly 
seems to drift between them has power to defeat what IS Their Will? 
T 24 A 2. 
To learn this course requires willingness to question EVERY 
value that you hold. 
Not one can be kept hidden and obscure, but it 
will jeopardize your learning. 
NO belief is neutral; every one has 
power to dictate each decision you make. 
For a decision is a CON¬ 
CLUSION, based on EVERYTHING that you believe. 
It is the OUT¬ 
COME of belief, and follows it as surely as does suffering follow 
guilt, and freedom sinlessness. 
There IS no substitute for peace. 


What God creates has NO alternative. 
The truth arises from what He 
knows. 
And your decisions come from your beliefs as certainly as all 
creation rose in His Mind BECAUSE of what He knows. 


T 24 B. 
Specialness as a Substitute for Love (Notes 1685 
11:60) 

T 24 B l. 
Love IS extension. 
To withhold the smallest gift is not to 
know love's purpose. 
Love offers everything forever. 
Hold back but 
ONE belief, ONE offering, and love is gone, because you asked a 
substitute to take its place. 
And now must war, the SUBSTITUTE for 
peace, come with the one alternative that you CAN choose for love. 

Your CHOOSING it has given it ALL the reality it seems to have. 

Beliefs will never OPENLY attack each other, because conflicting 
outcomes ARE impossible. 
But an UNRECOGNIZED T(839) -658 be- 

1-764 774 

PROOF COPY 


Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


lief is a decision to war in secret, where the results of conflict are 
kept unknown and NEVER brought to reason, to be considered sen¬ 
sible or not. 


T 24 B 2. 
And many senseless outcomes HAVE been reached, and 
meaningless decisions have been made and kept hidden, to become 
beliefs now GIVEN power to direct all subsequent decisions. 
Mis¬ 
take you not the power of these hidden warriors to disrupt your 
peace. 
For it IS at their mercy while you decide to leave it there. 
The 
secret enemies of peace, your least decisions to choose attack instead 
of love, unrecognized and swift to challenge YOU to combat and to 
violence far more inclusive than you think, are there by your elec¬ 
tion. 
Do not deny their presence, nor their terrible results. 
All that 
can BE denied is their REALITY, but NOT their outcome. 


T 24 B 3. 
All that is ever cherished as a hidden belief, to be defended 
though unrecognized, is FAITH IN SPECIALNESS. 
This takes many 
forms, but ALWAYS clashes with the reality of God's creation, and 
with the grandeur which He gave His Son. 
What else COULD jus¬ 
tify attack? For who could hate someone whose Self is his, and 
which He KNOWS? Only the special COULD have enemies, for they 
are different, and NOT the same. 
And difference of ANY kind im¬ 
poses orders of reality, and a need to judge that cannot BE escaped. 

What God created cannot be attacked, for there is nothing in the 
universe unlike itself. 


T 24 B 4. 
But what is different CALLS for judgment, and this MUST 
come from someone "better," someone incapable of being like what 
he condemns, "above" it, sinless BY COMPARISON with it. 
And 
thus does specialness become a means and end at once. 
For special¬ 
ness not only sets apart, but serves as grounds from which attack on 
those who seem "beneath" the special one is "natural" and "just." 
The special ones feel weak and frail BECAUSE of differences. 
For 
what would make them special IS their enemy. 
Yet they PROTECT 
its enmity, and call it "friend." On its behalf they fight against the 
universe, T(840) -659 for nothing in the world they value more. 



775 


1-765 


Volume I Text 


T 24 B 5. 
Specialness is the great dictator of the wrong decisions. 
Here 
is the grand illusion of what you are and what your brother is. 
And 
here is what MUST make the body dear, and WORTH preserving. 

SPECIALNESS MUST BE DEFENDED. 
Illusions CAN attack it, and 
they DO. 
For what your brother MUST become, to KEEP your spe¬ 
cialness, IS an illusion. 
He who is "worse" than you MUST be at¬ 
tacked, so that your specialness can live on his defeat. 
For special¬ 
ness is triumph, and its victory IS his defeat and shame. 
How can he 
live, with all your sins upon him? And who MUST be his conqueror 
but you? 

T 24 B 6. 
Would it be POSSIBLE for you to hate your brother if you 
were like him? COULD you attack him if you realized you journey 
WITH him, to a goal that is the SAME? Would you not help him 
reach it, in every way you could, if his attainment of it were yours? 
You ARE his enemy in specialness; his Friend in a SHARED pur¬ 
pose. 
Specialness can NEVER share, for it depends on goals that you 
ALONE can reach. 
And he must NEVER reach them, or YOUR goal 
is jeopardized. 
Can love HAVE meaning where the goal is triumph? 
And what decision CAN be made for this, that will NOT hurt you? 

T 24 B 7. 
Your brother is your Friend BECAUSE his Father created 
him like you. 
There IS no difference. 
You have been GIVEN to each 
other that love might be extended, NOT cut off from one another. 

What you KEEP is lost to you. 
God gave you both Himself. 
And to 
remember this is now the ONLY purpose that you share. 
And so it 
is the only one you HAVE. 
Could you attack each other if you chose 
to see NO specialness of any kind between you? Look fairly at 
whatever makes you give each other partial welcome, or would let 
you think that you are better off apart. 
Is it not ALWAYS your belief 
your specialness is LIMITED by your relationship? And is not THIS 
the "enemy" that makes you both illusions to each other? T(841) -660 
T 24 B 8. 
The fear of God and of each other comes from each unrecog¬ 
nized belief in specialness. 
For each demands the other bow to it 
AGAINST HIS WILL. 
And God Himself must honor it, or suffer 
vengeance. 
Every twinge of malice, or stab of hate, or wish to sepa¬ 


l-766 


776 


Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


rate arises here. 
For here the purpose that you share becomes ob¬ 
scured from BOTH of you. 
You would oppose this course because it 
teaches you, YOU ARE ALIKE. 
You have NO purpose that is not the 
same. 
And none your Father does not share with you. 
For your rela¬ 
tionship has been made clean of special goals. 
And would you now 
DEFEAT the goal of holiness that Heaven gave it? 

T 24 B 9. 
What perspective can the special have that does NOT 
change with every seeming blow, each slight, or fancied judgment 
on itself? Those who are special MUST defend illusions against the 
truth. 
For what is specialness but an attack upon the Will of God? 

You love your brother not while it is this you would defend 
AGAINST him. 
This is what HE attacks and YOU protect. 
Here is 
the ground of battle which you wage against him. 
Here MUST he be 
your enemy, and NOT your Friend. 
Never can there be peace 
among the different. 
He is your friend BECAUSE you are the same. 

T(842) -661 763 

T 24 C. 
The Treachery of Specialness (Notes 1695 11:70) 

T 24 c l. 
Comparison MUST be an ego device, for love makes none. 

Specialness ALWAYS makes comparisons. 
It is ESTABLISHED by a 
lack seen in another, and maintained by searching for and keeping 
clear in sight all lacks it can perceive. 
This does it seek, and this it 
looks upon. 
And ALWAYS whom it thus diminishes would be your 
Savior, had you not chosen to make of him a tiny measure of your 
specialness instead. 
Against the littleness you see in him you stand 
as tall and stately, clean and honest, pure and unsullied by compari¬ 
son with what you see. 


T 24 C 2. 
Nor do you understand it is YOURSELF that you diminish 
thus. 
Pursuit of specialness is always at the cost of peace. 
Who can 
attack his Savior, and cut him down, and recognize his strong sup¬ 
port? Who can detract from his omnipotence, and SHARE his 
power? And who can use him as the gauge of littleness, and be RE¬ 
LEASED from limits? You have a function in salvation. 
ITS pursuit 


August 7, 1967 


777 


1-767 



Volume I Text 


will bring you joy. 
But the pursuit of specialness MUST bring you 
pain. 
Here is a goal that would defeat salvation, and thus run 
COUNTER to the Will of God. 
To value specialness is to esteem an 
alien will, to which illusions of yourself ARE dearer than the truth. 


T 24 c 3. 
Specialness is the idea of sin MADE REAL. 
Sin is impossible 
even to imagine, without this base. 
For sin rose from it, out of noth¬ 
ingness, an evil flower with no roots at all. 
Here is the self-made 
savior, the creator who creates UNLIKE the Father, and which made 
His Son like to itself, and NOT like unto Him. 
His SPECIAL sons are 
many, NEVER one, each one in exile from himself and Him of 
Whom they are a part. 
Nor do they love the Oneness which created 
them as One with Him. 
They chose their specialness INSTEAD of 
Heaven and INSTEAD of peace, and wrapped it carefully in sin, to 
keep it "safe" from truth. 
T(843) -662 

T 24 c 4. 
You are NOT special. 
If you think you are, and would de¬ 
fend your specialness against the truth of what you REALLY are, 
how can you know the truth? What answer that the Holy Spirit 
gives can reach you, when it is your specialness to which you listen, 
and which asks AND ANSWERS? Its tiny answer, soundless in the 
melody which pours from God to you eternally in loving praise of 
what you are, is all you listen to. 
And that vast song of honor and of 
love for what you are seems silent and unheard before ITS mighti¬ 
ness. 
You strain your ears to hear ITS soundless voice, and yet the 
Call of God Himself is soundless to you. 


T 24 c 5. 
You CAN defend your specialness, but never will you hear 
the Voice for God beside it. 
They speak a different language, and 
they fall on different ears. 
To every special one a DIFFERENT mes¬ 
sage, and one with DIFFERENT meaning, is the truth. 
Yet how CAN 
truth be different to each one? The special messages the special hear 
convince them THEY are different and apart; each in his special sins 
and safe from love, which does not see his specialness at all. 
Christ's 
Vision IS their enemy, for it sees not what THEY would look upon. 

And it WOULD show them that the specialness they think they see 
IS an illusion. 



1-768 


778 


Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


T 24 C 6. 
What would they see instead? The shining radiance of the 
Son of God, so like his Father that the memory of Him springs in¬ 
stantly to mind. 
And with this memory, the Son remembers his own 
creations, as like to him as he is to his Father. 
And all the world he 
made, and all his specialness, and all the sins he held in its defense 
AGAINST himself, will vanish as his mind accepts the truth about 
himself, as it returns to take their place. 
This is the only "cost" of 
truth. 
You will no longer see what never was, nor hear what makes 
no sound. 
Is it a sacrifice to give up nothing, and to receive the Love 
of God forever? 

T 24 C 7. 
You who have chained your Savior to your specialness, and 
given it HIS place, remember this: He has NOT lost the power to 
forgive you all the sins you think you placed between him and the 
function of salvation GIVEN T(844) -663 him for you . 
764 Nor will you 
CHANGE his function, any more than you can change the truth in 
him and in yourself. 
But be you certain that the truth is just the same 
in both. 
It gives no different messages, and has ONE meaning. 
And 
it is one you BOTH can understand, and one which brings release to 
BOTH of you. 
Here stands your brother with the key to Heaven in 
his hand, held out to you . 
765 Let not the dream of specialness remain 
between you. 
What is one IS joined in truth. 


T 24 C 8. 
Think of the loveliness that you will see within yourself, 
when you have looked on him as on a Friend. 
He IS the enemy of 
specialness, but ONLY friend to what is real in you. 
Not one attack 
you thought you made on him has taken from him the gift that God 
would have him give to you. 
His need to give it is as great as yours 
to have it. 
Let him forgive you all your specialness, and make you 
whole in mind, and one with him. 
He waits for your forgiveness 
only that he may return it unto you. 
It is not God Who has con- 


764 Matthew 9:6 “But that you may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins”—then 
He said to the paralytic, “Arise, take up your bed, and go to your house.” 

7(0 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 


779 


1-769 



Volume I Text 


demned His Son. 
But ONLY you, to save his specialness, and kill his 
Self. 


T 24 c 9. 
You have come far along the way of truth; too far to falter 
now. 
Just one step more, and every vestige of the fear of God will 
melt away in love. 
Your brother's specialness and yours ARE ene¬ 
mies, and bound in hate to kill each other and DENY they are the 
same. 
Yet it is not illusions that have reached this final obstacle that 
seems to make God and His Heaven so remote that they cannot be 
reached. 
Here, in this holy place, does truth stand waiting to receive 
you both in silent blessing, and in peace so real and so encompass¬ 
ing that NOTHING stands outside. 


T 24 C 10. 
Leave all illusions of yourself OUTSIDE this place, to which 
you come in hope and honesty. 
Here is your Savior FROM your 
specialness. 
He is in need of your acceptance of himself as part of 
you, as you for his. 
You are alike to God as God is to Himself. 
He is 
not special, for He would not keep one part of what He is unto Him¬ 
self, NOT given to His Son, but kept T(845) -664 for Him alone. 
And it 
is this you fear; for, if He is not special, then He willed His Son be 
like Him, and your brother IS like you. 
Not special, but possessed of 
everything, INCLUDING you. 


T 24 C 11. 
Give him but what he has, remembering God gave Himself 
to BOTH of you in equal love, that both might share the universe 
with Him Who chose that love could never be divided and kept 
separate from what it IS and must forever be. 
You ARE your 
brother's; part of love was not DENIED to him . 
766 But can it be that 
YOU have lost because HE is complete? What has been given him 
makes YOU complete, as it does him. 
God's love gave you to him 
and him to you, BECAUSE He gave Himself. 
What is the same as 
God IS One with Him. 
And ONLY specialness could make the truth 
of God and you AS One seem anything BUT Heaven. 
And the hope 
of peace at last in sight. 



766 Genesis 4:9 Then the LORD said to Cain, “Where is Abel your brother?” 
He said, “I do not know. 
Am I my brother’s keeper?” 


1-770 


780 



Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


T 24 c 12. 
Specialness is the seal of treachery upon the gift of love. 

Whatever serves its purpose MUST be given to kill. 
No gift that 
bears its seal but offers treachery to giver and receiver. 
Not one 
glance from eyes it veils but looks on sight of death. 
Not one be¬ 
liever in its potency but seeks for bargains and for compromise that 
would establish sin as 767 love's substitute, and serve it faithfully. 


And no relationship that holds its purpose dear but clings to murder 
as safety's weapon, and the great defender of all illusions from the 
"threat" of love. 


T 24 C 13. 
The hope of specialness makes it seem possible God made 
the body as the prison-house which keeps His Son from Him. 
For it 
DEMANDS a special place God cannot enter, and a hiding-place 
where none is welcome but your tiny self. 
Nothing is sacred here 
but unto you, and you alone, apart and separate from all your 
brothers; safe from ALL intrusions of sanity upon illusions; safe 
from God, and safe for conflict everlasting. 
T(846) -665 Here are the 
gates of hell you closed upon yourself, to rule in madness and in 
loneliness your special kingdom, APART from God, AWAY from 
truth and from salvation . 
768 

T 24 c 14. 
The key you threw away God gave your brother, whose 
holy hands would offer it to you, when you were ready to accept 
His plan for your salvation in place of yours . 
769 How could this 
readiness be reached save through the sight of all your misery, and 
the awareness that your plan has failed, and will forever fail to bring 
you peace and joy of ANY kind? Through this despair you travel 
now, yet it is but ILLUSION of despair. 
The death of specialness is 
NOT your death, but your awaking into Life Eternal. 
You but 


767 The word “as” does not appear in the Urtext manuscript, but it is present as a shorthand glyph in the 
Notes. 
Because it is rather required to make this sentence grammatically correct, this apparent 
inadvertent omission is replaced. 
Both the HLC and FIP omit “as.” 

768 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 

769 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 


781 


1-771 



Volume I Text 


emerge from an illusion of what you are, to the acceptance of your¬ 
self as God created you. 
T(847) -666 770 

T 24 D. 
The Forgiveness of Specialness (Notes 1704 11:79) 

T 24 D l. 
Forgiveness is the end of specialness. 
Only illusions can BE 
forgiven, and then they disappear. 
Forgiveness is release from ALL 
illusions, and that is why it is impossible but PARTLY to forgive. 

No-one who clings to ONE illusion can see himself as sinless, for he 
holds one error to himself as lovely still. 
And so he calls it "unfor¬ 
givable," and makes it sin. 
How can he then give HIS forgiveness 
wholly, when he would not receive it for himself? For it is sure he 
WOULD receive it wholly, the instant that he gave it so. 
And thus 
HIS secret guilt would disappear, forgiven by himself. 


T 24 D 2. 
Whatever form of specialness you cherish, you have made 
sin. 
Inviolate it stands, strongly defended with all your puny might 
against the Will of God. 
And thus it stands against YOURSELF, 
YOUR enemy, NOT God's. 
So does it seem to split you off from 
God, and make you separate from Him as its defender. 
YOU would 
protect what God created not. 
And yet this idol that seems to GIVE 
you power has taken it away. 
For you have given your brother's 
birthright 771 to it, leaving HIM alone and unforgiven, and yourself in 
sin beside him, both in misery, before the idol that can save you not. 

T 24 D 3. 
It is not YOU that is so vulnerable and open to attack that 
just a word, a little whisper that you do not like, a circumstance that 
suits you not, or an event that you did not anticipate upsets your 
world, and hurls it into chaos. 
Truth is not frail. 
Illusions leave it 
perfectly unmoved and undisturbed. 
But specialness is NOT the 
truth in you. 
IT can be thrown off balance by ANYTHING. 
What 
rests on nothing NEVER can be stable. 
However large and over- 


770 August 15, 1967 

771 Genesis 25:33 And Jacob said. 
Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his 
birthright unto Jacob. 



1-772 


782 



Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 

blown it SEEMS to be, it still must rock and turn and whirl about 
with every breeze . 
772 

T 24 D 4. 
Without foundation nothing is secure. 
Would God have left 
His Son in such a state, where safety HAS no meaning? No, — His 
Son is safe, resting on Him. 
It is your specialness that is attacked by 
everything that walks and breathes, or creeps or crawls, or even 
lives at all. 
Nothing T(848) -667 is safe from its attack, and it is safe 
from nothing. 
It will forever more BE unforgiving, for that is what it 
IS. 
A secret vow that what God wants for you will never be, and that 
you will oppose His Will forever. 
Nor is it possible the two can ever 
be the same, while specialness stands like a flaming sword of death 
between them, and makes them enemies . 
773 

T 24 D 5. 
God asks for your forgiveness. 
He would have no separa¬ 
tion, like an alien will, rise between what He wills for you, and what 
YOU will. 
THEY are the same, for neither one wills specialness. 


How could they will the death of love itself? Yet they are powerless 
to make attack upon illusions. 
They are NOT BODIES; as One Mind 
they wait for all illusions to be BROUGHT to them, and left behind. 

Salvation challenges not even death. 
And God Himself, Who knows 
that death is NOT your will, must say, "Thy will be done /' 774 be¬ 
cause YOU think it is. 


T 24 D 6. 
Forgive the great Creator of the universe, the Source of life, 
of love and holiness, the perfect Father of a perfect Son, for your il¬ 
lusions of your specialness. 
Here is the hell you chose to be your 
home. 
He chose not this for you. 
Ask not He enter this. 
The way is 


112 Matthew 7:24-27 “Therefore whoever hears these sayings of Mine, and does them, I will liken him 
to a wise man who built his house on the rock: and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds 
blew and beat on that house; and it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock. 


“But everyone who hears these sayings of Mine, and does not do them, will be like a foolish man who 
built his house on the sand: and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on 
that house; and it fell. 
And great was its fall.” 

773 Genesis 3:24 So He drove out the man; and He placed cherubim at the east of the garden of Eden, 
and a flaming sword which turned every way, to guard the way to the tree of life. 


774 Matthew 6:10 “Thy kingdom come. 
Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth.” 

Matthew 26:39 He went a little farther and fell on His face, and prayed, saying, “O My Father, if it is 
possible, let this cup pass from Me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as You will.” 

Matthew 26:42 Again a second time he went away, and prayed, saying, “My Father, if this cannot pass 
away, except I drink it, thy will be done.” 


783 


1-773 



Volume I Text 


barred to love and to salvation. 
Yet if you would release your 
brother from the depths of hell, you have forgiven Him Whose Will 
it is you rest forever in the arms of peace, in perfect safety, and 
without the heat and malice of one thought of specialness to mar 
your rest. 
Forgive the Holy One the specialness He could not give, 
and yet you made instead. 


T 24 D 7. 
The special ones are all asleep, surrounded by a world of 
loveliness they do not see. 
Freedom and peace and joy stand there, 
beside the bier on which they sleep, and call them to come forth and 
waken from their dream of death . 
775 Yet they hear nothing. 
They are 
lost in dreams of specialness. 
They hate the call that would awaken 
them. 
And they curse God because He did not make their dream 
reality. 
Curse God and die , 776 but not by Him Who made not death, 
but only in the dreams. 
Open your eyes a little; T(849) -668 see the 
Savior God gave to you that you might look on him, and give him 
back his birthright . 
777 It is YOURS. 


T 24 D 8. 
The slaves of specialness will yet be free. 
Such is the Will of 
God, and of His Son. 
Would God condemn HIMSELF to hell and to 
damnation? And do YOU will that this be done unto your Savior? 
God calls to you from him to join His Will to save you BOTH from 
hell. 
Look on the print of nails upon his hands that he holds out for 
your forgiveness . 
778 God asks your mercy on His Son, and on Him¬ 
self. 
Deny them not. 
They ask of you but that your will be done. 

They seek your love that you may love yourself. 
Love not your spe¬ 
cialness instead of them. 
The print of nails are 779 on your hands as 


775 John 11:43 Now when He had said these things, He cried with a loud voice, “Lazarus, come forth!” 

776 Job 2:9 Then said his wife unto him. 
Dost thou still retain thine integrity? curse God, and die. 


777 Genesis 25:33 And Jacob said. 
Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his 
birthright unto Jacob. 


77!> John 20:25 The other disciples therefore said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” So he said to them, 
“Unless I see in His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my 
hand into His side, I will not believe.” 

779 We have an agreement in number grammar problem here. 
It has to be "prints of nails are” or "print 
of nails is.” Both Notes and Urtext have this problem. 
F1P resolves it by changing “are” to “is.” We 
cannot exclude however the exercise of “poetic license.” 


1-774 


784 



Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


well . 
780 Forgive your Father it was NOT Fhs Will that you be cruci¬ 
fied. 
T(850) -669 781 

T 24 E. 
Specialness and Salvation (Notes 1709 11:84) 

T 24 E l. 
Specialness is a lack of trust in anyone except yourself. 
Faith 
is invested in yourself alone. 
Everything else becomes your enemy, 
feared and attacked, deadly and dangerous, hated and worthy only 
of destruction. 
Whatever gentleness it offers is but deception, but its 
hate is real. 
In danger of destruction, it MUST kill, and YOU are 
drawn to it, to kill it first. 
And such is guilt's attraction. 
Here is 
death enthroned as savior; crucifixion is now redemption, and sal¬ 
vation can ONLY mean destruction of the world, EXCEPT YOUR¬ 
SELF. 


T 24 E 2. 
What could the purpose of the body Be BUT specialness? 
And it is this that makes it frail and helpless in its own defense. 
It 
was CONCEIVED to make YOU frail and helpless. 
The goal of sepa¬ 
ration is its curse. 
But bodies HAVE no goal. 
Purpose is of the mind. 

And minds can change, as they desire. 
What they ARE, and all their 
attributes, CANNOT change. 
But what they hold as purpose CAN 
be changed, and body states must shift accordingly. 
Of itself, the 
body can do nothing. 
See it as means to hurt, and it is hurt. 
See it as 
means to heal, and it is healed. 


T 24 E 3. 
YOU CAN BUT HURT YOURSELF. 
This has been oft re¬ 
peated, but is difficult to grasp as yet. 
To minds intent on special¬ 
ness, it is impossible. 
But to those who wish to heal and NOT attack, 
it is quite obvious. 
The purpose of attack is in the MIND, and its ef¬ 
fects are felt but where it IS. 
Nor is mind limited; so must it be that 
harmful purpose hurts the mind AS ONE. 
Nothing could make 
LESS sense to specialness. 
Nothing could make MORE sense to 
miracles. 
For miracles are merely change of purpose from hurt to 
healing. 



780 John 20:25 The other disciples therefore said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” So he said to them, 
“Unless I see in His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my 
hand into His side, I will not believe.” 

781 August 17, 1963[?] 


785 


1-775 



Volume I Text 


T 24 E 4. 
This shift in purpose DOES "endanger" specialness, but only 
in the sense that all illusions are "threatened" by the truth. 
They will 
NOT stand before it, yet what comfort has ever been in them, that 
you would keep the T(851) -670 gift your Father asks from Him, and 
give it there instead? Given to HIM, the universe is yours. 
Offered to 
THEM, no gifts can be returned. 
What you have given specialness 
has left you bankrupt, and your treasure-house barren and empty, 
with an open door inviting everything that would disturb your 
peace to enter and destroy . 
782 

T 24 E 5. 
Long ago we said consider not the means by which salvation 
is attained, nor how to reach it. 
But DO consider, and consider well, 
whether it be your WISH that you might see your brother sinless. 
To 
specialness the answer MUST be "no." A sinless brother IS its en¬ 
emy, while sin, if it were possible, WOULD be its friend. 
Your 
brother's "sins" would justify itself, and GIVE it meaning that the 
truth denies. 
All that is real proclaims his sinlessness. 
All that is 
false proclaims his sins as real. 
If HE is sinful, then is YOUR reality 
not real, but just a dream of specialness which lasts an instant, 
crumbling into dust. 


T 24 E 6. 
Do not defend this senseless dream, in which God is bereft 
of what He loves, and you remain beyond salvation. 
Only this is cer¬ 
tain, in this shifting world which has NO meaning in reality: When 
peace is not with you ENTIRELY, and when you suffer pain of ANY 
kind, you have beheld some sin within your brother, AND HAVE 
REJOICED at what you thought was there. 
Your specialness seemed 
safe BECAUSE of it. 
And thus you saved what YOU appointed to be 
your savior, and crucified the one whom God has given you instead. 

So are you bound with him, for you ARE one with him . 
783 And so is 
specialness HIS enemy, and YOURS as well. 
T(852) -671 784 


' ,22 John 20:25 The other disciples therefore said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” So he said to them, 
“Unless I see in His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my 
hand into His side, I will not believe.” 

783 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 

784 August 28, 1967 


1-776 


786 



Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


T 24 F. 
The Resolution of the Dream (Notes 1713 11:88) 

T 24 F 1 . 
The Christ in you is very still. 
He looks on what He loves, 
and knows it as Himself. 
And thus does He rejoice at what He sees, 
because He knows that it is one with Him, and with His Father. 
Spe¬ 
cialness, too, takes joy in what it sees, although it is not true. 
Yet 
what you seek for IS a source of joy, as you conceive it. 
What you 
wish IS true for you. 
Nor is it possible that you can wish for some¬ 
thing, and LACK faith that it is so. 
WISHING MAKES REAL, as 
surely as does Will create. 
The power of a wish upholds illusions as 
strongly as does Love extend Itself. 
Except that one deludes; the 
other heals. 


T 24 F 2. 
There is no dream of specialness, however hidden or dis¬ 
guised its form, however lovely it may seem to be, however much it 
delicately offers the hope of peace and the escape from pain, in 
which you suffer not your condemnation. 
In dreams effect and 
cause are interchanged, for here the maker of the dream believes 
that what he made is happening TO him. 
He does NOT realize he 
picked a thread from here, a scrap from there, and wove a picture 
out of nothing. 
For the parts do NOT belong together, and the whole 
contributes nothing to the parts to GIVE them meaning. 


T 24 F 3. 
Where could your peace arise BUT from forgiveness? The 
Christ in you looks ONLY on the truth, and sees no condemnation 
that could NEED forgiveness. 
HE is at peace BECAUSE He sees no 
sin. 
Identify with Him, and what has He that you have not? He is 
your eyes, your ears, your hands, your feet. 
How gentle are the 
sights He sees, the sounds He hears. 
How beautiful His hand that 
holds His brother's, and how lovingly He walks beside him, show¬ 
ing him what CAN be seen and heard, and where he will see noth¬ 
ing, and there IS no sound to hear. 
T(853) -672 

T 24 F 4. 
Yet let your specialness direct his way, and YOU will follow. 

And both will walk in danger, each intent, in the dark forest of the 
sightless, unlit but by the shifting, tiny gleams that spark an instant 
from the fireflies of sin and then go out, to lead the other to a name¬ 
less precipice and hurl him over it. 
For what can specialness delight 


787 


1-777 


Volume I Text 


in but to kill? What does it seek for but the sight of death? Where 
does it lead but to destruction? Yet think not that it looked upon 
your brother FIRST, nor hated him BEFORE it hated you . 
785 The sin 
its eyes behold in him, and love to look upon it saw in you, and 
looks on still with joy. 


T 24 F 5. 
Yet IS it joy to look upon decay and madness, and believe 
this crumbling thing, with flesh already loosened from the bone and 
sightless holes for eyes, is like yourself? Rejoice you FFAVE no eyes 
with which to see; no ears to listen, and no hands to hold nor feet to 
guide. 
Be glad that ONLY Christ can lend you Fiis, while you have 
need of them. 
They are illusions, too, as much as yours. 
And yet, 
because they serve a different purpose, the strength their PURPOSE 
holds is given TFFEM. 
And what TFFEY see and hear and hold and 
lead is given light, that YOU may lead as you were led. 


T 24 F 6. 
The Christ in you is very still. 
FFe knows where you are go¬ 
ing, and FFe leads you there in gentleness and blessing all the way. 

FFis love for God replaces ALL the fear you thought you saw within 
yourself. 
FFis holiness shows you FFimself in him whose hand you 
hold, and whom you lead to FFim. 
And what you see IS like your¬ 
self. 
For what but Christ IS there to see and hear and love, and fol¬ 
low home? FFe looked upon you FIRST, but recognized that you 
were not complete. 
And so FFe sought for your completion in each 
living thing that FFe beholds and loves. 
And seeks it still, that each 
might offer YOU the Love of God. 
T(854) -673 

T 24 F 7. 
Yet is FFe quiet, for FFe knows that Love is in you now, and 
safely held in you by that same hand that holds your brother's in 
your own. 
Christ's hand holds all FFis brothers in FFimself. 
FFe gives 
them vision for their sightless eyes, and sings to them of FFeaven, 
that their ears may hear no more the sound of battle and of death. 

FFe reaches through them, holding out FFis hand, that everyone may 
bless all living things, and see their holiness. 
And FFe rejoices that 
these sights are YOURS, to look upon with FFim and share FFis joy. 



785 John 15:18 "If the world hates you, you know that it hated Me before it hated you.” 


1-778 


788 




Chapter 24 - Speciainess and Separation 


His perfect LACK of specialness He offers you, that you may save 
all living things from death, receiving from each one the gift of Life 
that your forgiveness offers to your Self. 


T 24 F 8. 
The sight of Christ is all there is to see. 
The song of Christ is 
all there is to hear. 
The hand of Christ is all there is to hold. 
There is 
no journey but to walk with Him. 
You who would be content with 
specialness, and seek salvation in a war with Love, consider this : 786 
The holy Lord of Heaven has Himself come down to you to offer 
you your own completion. 
What is His is yours, because in your 
completion is His Own. 
He Who willed not to be without His Son 
could never will that you be Brotherless. 
And would He give a 
Brother unto you except he be as perfect as yourself, and just as like 
to Him in holiness as YOU must be? 

T 24 F 9. 
There must be doubt BEFORE there can be conflict. 
And 
EVERY doubt must be about yourself. 
Christ HAS no doubt, and 
from His certainty His quiet comes. 
He will exchange His certainty 
for ALL your doubts, if you agree that He is one with you, and that 
this Oneness is endless, timeless, and within your grasp BECAUSE 
your hands are His. 
He is within you, yet He walks beside you and 
before, leading the way that He must go to find Himself complete. 

His quietness becomes YOUR certainty. 
And where is doubt, when 
certainty has come? T(855) -674 787 

T 24 G. 
Salvation from Fear (Notes 1719 11:94) 

T 24 G l. 
Before your brother's holiness the world is still, and peace 
descends on it in gentleness and blessing so complete, that not one 
trace of conflict still remains to haunt you in the darkness of the 
night. 
He is your Savior from the dreams of terror. 
He is the healing 
of your sense of sacrifice, and fear that what you have will scatter 
with the wind, and turn to dust. 
In him is your assurance God is 
here, and with you now. 
While he is what he is, you can be sure that 


786 The Urtext manuscript has a semi-colon, but all other versions, including the Notes , have a colon. 

The semi-colon would appear to be a typing mistake. 


787 Sept. 
25, 1967 


789 


1-779 



Volume I Text 


God is knowable, and WILL be known to you. 
For He could never 
leave His own creation. 
And the sign that this is so lies in your 
brother, offered you that all your doubts about yourself may disap¬ 
pear before his holiness. 


T 24 G 2. 
See in him God's creation. 
For in him his Father waits for 
your acknowledgment that He created YOU as part of Him. 
Without 
you, there would be a lack in God, a Heaven incomplete, a Son 
without a Father. 
There could be no universe, and no reality. 
For 
what God wills is whole, and part of Him BECAUSE His Will is 
One. 
Nothing alive that is not part of Him, and nothing is but IS 
alive in Him. 
Your brother's holiness shows you that God is One 
with him AND you; that what he has is yours BECAUSE you are not 
separate from him OR from his Father. 


T 24 G 3. 
Nothing is lost to you in all the universe. 
Nothing that God 
created has He failed to lay before you lovingly, as yours forever. 

And no thought within His Mind is absent from your own. 
It is His 
Will you SHARE His love for you, and look upon yourself as lov¬ 
ingly as He conceived of you before the world began, and as He 
knows you still. 
God changes not His Mind about His Son with 
passing circumstance which has no meaning in eternity where He 
abides, and you with Him. 
Your brother IS as He created him. 
And 
it is this that saves YOU from a world that He created not. 
T(856) -675 

T 24 G 4. 
Forget not that the healing of God's Son is all the world is 
for. 
That is the ONLY purpose the Holy Spirit sees in it, and thus the 
only one it HAS. 
Until you see the healing of the Son as all you wish 
to be accomplished by the world, by time, and ALL appearances, 
you will NOT know the Father OR yourself. 
For you will use the 
world for what is NOT its purpose, and will NOT escape its laws of 
violence and death. 
Yet it is GIVEN you to be BEYOND its laws in 
ALL respects, in EVERY way, and EVERY circumstance; in ALL 
temptation to perceive what is NOT there, and ALL belief God's Son 
can suffer pain because he sees himself as he is not. 


T 24 G 5. 
Look on your brother, and behold in him the whole reversal 
of the laws that SEEM to rule this world. 
See in his freedom YOURS, 


1-780 


790 


Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


for such it IS. 
Let not his specialness obscure the truth in him, for not 
one law of death you bind him to will YOU escape. 
And not one sin 
you see in him but keeps you BOTH in hell. 
Yet will his perfect 
sinlessness RELEASE you both, for holiness is quite impartial, with 
one judgment made for all it looks upon. 
And that is made, not of 
itself, but through the Voice that speaks for God in everything that 
lives, and shares His Being . 
788 

T 24 G 6. 
It is HIS sinlessness that eyes that see can look upon. 
It is 
HIS loveliness they see in everything. 
And it is HE they look for 
everywhere, and find no sight or place or time where He is NOT. 

Within your brother's holiness, the perfect frame for YOUR salva¬ 
tion and the world's, is set the shining memory of Him in Whom 
your brother lives, and you along with him. 
Let not your eyes be 
blinded by the veil of specialness that hides the face of Christ from 
him, and you as well. 
And let the fear of God no longer hold the vi¬ 
sion you were MEANT to see from you. 
Your brother's BODY 
shows not Christ to you. 
He IS set forth within his holiness. 


T 24 G 7. 
Choose, then, his body OR his holiness as what you WANT 
to see, and which you choose is yours to look upon. 
Yet will you 
choose in countless T(857) -676 situations, and through time which 
seems to have no end, until the truth be your decision. 
For eternity 
is NOT regained by still one more denial of the Christ in him. 
And 
where is YOUR salvation, if he is but a body? Where is YOUR peace, 
but in his holiness? And where is God Himself but in that part of 
Him He set forever in your brother's holiness, that YOU might see 
the truth about yourself set forth at last in terms you recognized and 
understood? 

T 24 G 8. 
Your brother's holiness is sacrament and benediction unto 
YOU. 
His errors can NOT withhold God's blessing from himself, 
nor you who see him truly. 
His mistakes can cause delay, which it is 
given YOU to take from him, that both may end a journey that has 


788 Acts 17:28 for in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have 
said, “For we are also His offspring.” 


791 


1-781 



Volume I Text 


never been begun, and NEEDS no end. 
What never was is NOT a 
part of you. 
Yet will you think it is, until you realize that it is not a 
part of him who stands beside you. 
He is the mirror of yourself, 
wherein you see the judgment you have laid on BOTH of you. 
The 
Christ in you beholds his holiness. 
Your specialness looks on his 
body, and beholds him not. 


T 24 G 9. 
See him as what he IS, that YOUR deliverance may not be 
long. 
A senseless wandering, without a purpose and without ac¬ 
complishment of any kind, is all the other choice can offer you. 
Fu¬ 
tility of function not fulfilled will haunt you while your brother lies 
asleep, 'til what has been assigned to you is done, and he is risen 
from the past. 
He who condemned himself, and you as well, is given 
you to save from condemnation, along with you. 
And both shall see 
God's glory in His Son, whom you mistook as flesh, and bound to 
laws that have NO power over him at all. 


T 24 G10. 
Would you not gladly realize these laws are not for YOU? 
Then see HIM not as prisoner to them. 
It CANNOT be what governs 
part of God holds not for all the rest. 
You place YOURSELF under 
the laws you see as ruling HIM. 
Think, then, how great the Love of 
God for YOU must be, that T(858) -677 He has given you a part of 
Him, to save from pain and give YOU happiness. 
And never doubt 
but that your specialness will disappear before the Will of God Who 
loves each part of Him with equal love and care. 
The Christ in you 
CAN see your brother truly. 
And would you decide AGAINST the 
holiness He sees? 

T 24 G11. 
Specialness is the function that you gave yourself. 
It stands 
for you alone, as self-created, self-maintained, in need of nothing, 
and unjoined with anything beyond the body. 
In its eyes, you are a 
separate universe, with all the power to hold itself complete within 
itself, with every entry shut against intrusion, and every window 
barred against the light. 
Always attacked and always furious, with 
anger always fully justified, you have pursued this goal with vigi¬ 
lance you never thought to yield, and effort that you never thought 


1-782 


792 


Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


to cease. 
And all this grim determination was for this: YOU 
WANTED SPECIALNESS TO BE THE TRUTH. 


T 24 G12. 
Now you are merely asked that you pursue another goal 
with far LESS vigilance, with little effort and with little time, and 
with the power of God maintaining it, and promising success. 
Yet, 
of the two, it is THIS one you find more difficult. 
The SACRIFICE of 
self you understand, nor do you deem THIS cost too heavy. 
But a 
tiny willingness, a nod to God, a greeting to the Christ in you, you 
find a burden wearisome and tedious, too heavy to be borne. 
Yet, to 
the dedication to the truth as GOD established it, NO sacrifice is 
asked, NO strain called forth, and all the power of Heaven and the 
might of truth itself is given to provide the means, and GUARAN¬ 
TEE the goal's accomplishment. 


T 24 G13. 
You who believe it easier to see your brother's body than 
his holiness, be sure you understand what made this judgment. 


Here is the voice of specialness heard clearly, judging AGAINST the 
Christ, and setting forth, for YOU, the purpose that you CAN attain, 
and what you can NOT do. 
Forget not that this T(859) -678 judgment 
MUST apply to what you do with IT as your ally. 
For what you do 
through Christ it does not know. 
To Him, this judgment makes no 
sense at all, for ONLY what His Father wills is possible, and there IS 
no alternative for Him to see. 
Out of His LACK of conflict comes 
your peace. 
And from His purpose come the means for effortless 
accomplishment and rest. 
T(860) -679 789 

T 24 H. 
The Meeting-Place (Notes 172711:102) 

T 24 H1. 
How bitterly does everyone tied to this world defend the 
specialness he WANTS to be the truth! His wish is law to him, and 
he obeys. 
Nothing his specialness demands does he withhold. 
Noth¬ 
ing it needs does he deny to what he loves. 
And, while it calls to 
him, he hears no other Voice. 
No effort is too great, no cost too 
much, no price too dear, to save his specialness from the least slight, 
the tiniest attack, the whispered doubt, the hint of threat, or any- 


789 Sept. 
27, 1967 


793 


1-783 



Volume I Text 


thing but deepest reverence. 
This is your son, beloved of you as you 
are to your Father . 
790 Yet it stands in place of your creations, who 
ARE Son to you, that you might SHARE the Fatherhood of God, not 
snatch it FROM Him. 


T 24 H 2. 
What IS this son that you have made to be your strength? 
What is this child of earth, on whom such love is lavished? What is 
this parody of God's creation, that takes the place of YOURS? And 
where are THEY, now that the host of God has found another son 
that he prefers to them? The memory of God shines not alone. 
What 
is within your brother still contains ALL of creation, everything cre¬ 
ated and creating, born and unborn as yet, still in the future or ap¬ 
parently gone by. 
What is in him is changeless, and YOUR change¬ 
lessness is recognized in its acknowledgment. 
The holiness in you 
belongs to him. 
And, BY your seeing it in him, returns to YOU. 


T 24 H 3. 
All of the tribute you have given specialness belongs to him, 
and thus returns to you. 
All of the love and care, the strong protec¬ 
tion, the thought by day and night, the deep concern, the powerful 
conviction this is you, belong to him. 
Nothing you gave to special¬ 
ness but is HIS due. 
And nothing due him is NOT due to you. 
How 
will you KNOW your worth, while specialness claims you instead? 
How can you FAIL to know it, in his holiness? Seek not to make 
your specialness the truth, for, if it were, you would be lost indeed. 

Be thankful, rather, it is given you to see T(86l) -680 his holiness BE¬ 
CAUSE it is the truth. 
And what is true in him MUST be as true in 
you. 


T 24 H 4. 
Ask yourself this: CAN YOU PROTECT THE MIND? The 
body, yes, a little; not from time, but temporarily. 
And much you 
think to save, you hurt. 
What would you save it FOR? For, in that 
choice, lie both its health AND harm. 
Save it for show, as bait to 
catch another fish, to house your specialness in better style, or 


7,0 Matthew 3:17 And suddenly a voice came from heaven, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased.” 

Matthew 17:5 While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them; and suddenly a 
voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. 
Hear Him!” 


1-784 


794 



Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


weave a frame of loveliness around your hate, and you condemn it 
to decay and pain. 
And, if you see this purpose in your brother's, 
such is your condemnation of your own. 
Weave rather, then, a 
frame of holiness around him, that the truth may shine in him, and 
give YOU safety from decay. 


T 24 H 5. 
The Father keeps what HE created safe. 
YOU cannot touch it 
with the false ideas you made, BECAUSE it was created not by you. 

Let not your foolish fancies frighten you. 
What is immortal cannot 
BE attacked; what is but temporal HAS no effect. 
Only the PUR¬ 
POSE that you see in it has meaning, and, if THAT is true, its safety 
rests secure. 
If not, it HAS no purpose, and is means for nothing. 

Whatever is perceived as means for truth SHARES in its holiness, 
and rests in light as safely as Itself. 
Nor will that light go out when it 
is gone. 
Its holy purpose GAVE it immortality, setting another light 
in Heaven, where your creations recognize a gift from YOU, a sign 
that you have NOT forgotten them. 


T 24 H 6. 
The test of EVERYTHING on earth is simply this: "What is it 
FOR?" The answer makes it what it IS for you. 
It has NO meaning of 
itself, yet you can GIVE reality to it, according to the purpose which 
YOU serve. 
Here, YOU are but means, along with it. 
God is a Means 
as well as End. 
In Heaven, means and end are one, and One with 
Him. 
This is the state of true creation, found not within time, but in 
eternity. 
To no-one here is this describable. 
Nor is there any way to 
learn what this condition means. 
Not 'til you go PAST learning to 
the Given; not 'til you make again T(862) -681 a holy home for YOUR 
creations is it understood. 


T 24 H 7. 
A co-creator with the Father must have a Son. 
Yet must this 
Son have been created like Himself. 
A perfect Being, all- 
encompassing and all-encompassed, nothing to add and nothing 
taken FROM; not born of size nor weight nor time, nor held to limits 
or uncertainties of ANY kind. 
Here do the means and end unite as 
One, nor does this One have any end at all. 
All this is true, and yet it 
has no meaning to anyone who still retains one unlearned lesson in 


795 


1-785 


Volume I Text 


his memory; one thought with purpose still uncertain, or one wish 
with a divided aim. 


T 24 H 8. 
This course makes no attempt to teach what cannot easily be 
learned. 
Its scope does not exceed your own. 
Except to say that what 
is yours will come to you when you are ready. 
Here, are the means 
and purpose separate, because they were so made and so perceived. 

And therefore do we deal with them as if they were. 
It is essential it 
be kept in mind that ALL perception still is upside down, until its 
PURPOSE has been understood. 
Perception does not SEEM to be a 
means. 
And it is this that makes it hard to grasp the whole extent to 
which it MUST depend on what you use it FOR. 


T 24 H 9. 
Perception seems to TEACH you what you see. 
Yet it but 
witnesses to what YOU taught. 
It is the outward picture of a wish, 
an image that you WANTED to be true. 
Look at yourself, and you 
will see a body. 
Look at this body in a different light, and it looks 
different. 
And without a light, it seems that it is gone. 
Yet you are 
reassured that it is there, because you still can feel it with your 
hands, and hear it move. 


T 24 H 10 . 
Here is an image that you WANT to be yourself. 
It is the 
means to make your wish come true. 
It GIVES the eyes with which 
you look on it, the hands that feel it, and the ears with which you 
listened to the sounds it makes. 
IT PROVES ITS OWN REALITY TO 
YOU. 
Thus is the body made a THEORY of yourself, with NO pro¬ 
visions made for evidence BEYOND itself, and NO escape within 
T(863) -682 its sight. 
Its course is sure, when seen through its own 
eyes. 
It grows and withers, flourishes and dies. 
And you cannot con¬ 
ceive of you APART from it. 
You brand it sinful, and you hate its 
acts, judging it evil. 
Yet your specialness whispers, "Here is my own 
beloved son, with whom I am well pleased ." 791 

T 24 H li. 
Thus does the son become the MEANS to serve his father's 
purpose. 
NOT identical, not even like, but still a means to offer to 
the father WHAT HE WANTS. 
Such is the travesty on God's crea- 


see previous footnote 


1-786 


796 



Chapter 24 - Specialness and Separation 


tion. 
For, as His Son's creation gave HIM joy, and witness to HIS 
Love and shared HIS Purpose, so does the body testify to the idea 
that made it, and speak for ITS reality and truth. 
And thus are two 
sons made, and BOTH appear to walk this earth without a meeting 
place, and NO encounter. 
One do you see OUTSIDE yourself, your 
OWN beloved son. 
The other rests within. 
His Father's Son, within 
your brother as he is in you. 
T(864) -683 792 

T 24 H 12. 
Their difference does not lie in how they look, or where 
they go, or even what they do. 
THEY SHARE A DIFFERENT PUR¬ 
POSE. 
It is this that joins them to their like, and separates each from 
all aspects with a DIFFERENT purpose. 
The Son of God retains his 
Father's Will. 
The son of man perceives an alien will, AND WISHES 
IT WERE SO. 
And thus does his perception serve his wish, by giv¬ 
ing it APPEARANCES of truth. 
Yet can perception serve ANOTHER 
goal. 
It is not bound to specialness, but by your choice. 
And it IS 
given you to make a different choice, and use perception FOR A 
DIFFERENT PURPOSE. 
And what you see will serve that purpose 
well, and prove ITS own reality to you. 



Sept. 
29, 1967 


797 


1-787 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 25 - The Remedy 

T 25 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1735 11:110) 

T 25 A1. 
The Christ in you inhabits NOT a body. 
Yet He IS in you. 

And thus MUST it be that YOU are not within a body. 
What is 
within you CANNOT be outside. 
And it is certain that YOU cannot 
be APART from what is at the very CENTER of your life. 
What 
gives you life cannot be housed in death. 
NO MORE CAN YOU. 

Christ is within a frame of holiness, whose ONLY purpose is that He 
may be made manifest to those who know Him not; that He may 
call to them to come to Him, and see Him where they THOUGHT 
their bodies were. 
Then will their bodies melt away, that they may 
frame His holiness in them. 


T 25 A 2. 
No-one who carries Christ in him can fail to recognize Him 
everywhere. 
EXCEPT IN BODIES. 
And, as long as they believe 
THEY are in bodies, where they think they are He CANNOT be. 


And so they carry Him unknowingly, and do not make Him mani¬ 
fest. 
And thus they do not recognize Him where He IS. 
The son of 
man is NOT the risen Christ . 
793 Yet does the Son of God abide EX¬ 
ACTLY where he is, and walks with him, within his holiness, as 
plain to see as is his specialness set forth within his body. 
T(865) -684 

T 25 A 3. 
The body needs NO healing. 
But the mind that thinks it IS a 
body is sick indeed! And it is here that Christ sets forth the remedy. 

His PURPOSE folds the body in His light, and fills it with the holi¬ 
ness that shines from HIM. 
And nothing that the body says or does 
but makes HIM manifest. 
To those who know Him not it carries 
Him, in gentleness and love, to heal their minds. 
Such is the mission 
that your brother has for YOU. 
And such it MUST be that YOUR 
mission is for HIM. 



793 Matthew 8:20 And Jesus said to him, “Foxes have holes and birds of the air have nests, but the Son 
of Man has nowhere to lay His head.” 


1-788 


798 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


T 25 B. 
The Appointed Task (Notes 1737 11:112) 

T 25 B l. 
It CANNOT be that it is hard to do the task that Christ ap¬ 
pointed you to do, since it is HE that does it. 
And, in the DOING of 
it, will you learn the body merely SEEMS to be the means to do it. 

For the Mind is HIS. 
And so it MUST be yours. 
HIS holiness directs 
the body THROUGH the mind at one with Him. 
And YOU are 
manifest unto your holy brother, as he to you. 
Here is the meeting of 
the holy Christ unto Himself. 
Nor ANY differences perceived to 
stand between the aspects of His holiness, which meet and join, and 
raise Him to His Father, whole and pure, and worthy of His Ever¬ 
lasting Love . 
794 

T 25 B 2. 
How can you manifest the Christ in you, EXCEPT you look 
on holiness, and see Him there? Perception tells you YOU are mani¬ 
fest in what you see. 
Behold the body, and you WILL believe that 
you are there. 
And every body that you look upon reminds you of 
yourself; YOUR sinfulness, YOUR evil, and, above all YOUR death. 

And would you not despise the one who tells you this, and seek HIS 
death instead? The message and the messenger ARE one. 
And you 
MUST see your brother as yourself. 
Framed in his body you will see 
YOUR sinfulness, wherein YOU stand condemned. 
Set in his holi¬ 
ness, the Christ in him proclaims HIMSELF as you. 


T 25 B 3. 
Perception is a choice of what you want YOURSELF to be; 
the world you WANT to live in, and the state in which you think 
your mind will be content and satisfied. 
It chooses where you think 
your safety lies, AT YOUR DECISION. 
It reveals yourself to you, as 
YOU would have you be. 
T(866) -685 And ALWAYS is it faithful to 
your purpose, from which it never separates, nor gives the slightest 
witness unto anything the purpose IN YOUR MIND upholdeth not. 

Perception is a PART of what it is your purpose to behold, for 
means and end are NEVER separate. 
And thus you learn what 
SEEMS to have a life APART has none. 



9 Jeremiah 31:3 The LORD has appeared of old to me, saying: 
“Yes, I have loved you with an everlasting love; 

Therefore with lovingkindness I have drawn you. 



799 


1-789 



Volume I Text 


T 25 B 4. 
YOU are the means for God. 
NOT separate, nor with a life 
apart from His. 
HIS Life is manifest in you who are His Son. 
Each 
aspect of Himself is framed in holiness and perfect purity, in love 
celestial and so complete It wishes ONLY that It may release ALL 
that It looks upon unto Itself. 
Its radiance shines through each body 
that It looks upon, and brushes ALL its darkness into light merely 
by looking PAST it TO the Light. 
The veil is lifted through Its gen¬ 
tleness, and NOTHING hides the face of Christ from its beholders. 

And BOTH of you stand there before Him now, to let HIM draw 
aside the veil that SEEMS to keep you separate and apart. 
T(867) -686 

795 

T 25 B 5. 
Since you believe that YOU are separate. 
Heaven presents 
itself to you as separate, too. 
NOT that it is the truth, but that the 
link that has been given you to JOIN the truth may reach to you 
through what you understand. 
Father and Son and Holy Spirit are 
as One, as all your brothers join as one in truth. 
Christ and His Fa¬ 
ther NEVER have been separate, and Christ abides within your un¬ 
derstanding, in the part of you that SHARES His Father's Will. 
The 
Holy Spirit links the other part, the tiny, mad desire to be separate, 
different, and special, TO the Christ, to make the Oneness clear to 
what is REALLY One. 
In this world, this is not understood, but 
CAN be taught. 


T 25 B 6. 
The Holy Spirit serves Christ's purpose in your mind, so that 
the aim of specialness CAN be corrected where the error lies. 
Be¬ 
cause His purpose still is One with both the Father AND the Son, He 
KNOWS the Will of God, and what you REALLY will. 
But this is 
understood by mind PERCEIVED as one, AWARE that it is one, 
AND SO EXPERIENCED. 
It is the Holy Spirit's function to teach 
you HOW this Oneness is experienced; WHAT you must do that it 
can BE experienced; and WHERE you should go to do it. 
All this 
takes note of time and place AS IF they were discrete, for while YOU 
think that part of YOU is separate, the concept of a Oneness JOINED 
as one is meaningless. 



795 October 2, 1967 


1-790 


800 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


T 25 B 7. 
It is apparent that a mind so split could NEVER be the 
teacher of the Oneness Which unites ALL things within Itself. 
And 
so what IS within this mind, and DOES unite all things together 
MUST be its teacher. 
Yet must It use the language which this mind 
can understand in the condition which it THINKS it is. 
And It must 
use all learning to transfer illusions TO the truth, taking all FALSE 
ideas of what you are, and leading you BEYOND them to the truth 
that IS beyond them. 
All this can very simply be reduced to this: 
What is the same can NOT be different, and what is One can NOT 
have separate parts. 
T(868) -687 796 

T 25 C. 
The Savior from the Dark (Notes 1746 11:121) 

T 25 C l. 
Is it not evident that what the body's eyes perceive FILLS 
YOU WITH FEAR? Perhaps you think you find a hope of satisfac¬ 
tion there. 
Perhaps you fancy to attain some peace and satisfaction 
in the world as YOU perceive it. 
Yet it MUST be evident the out¬ 
come DOES NOT CHANGE. 
Despite your hopes and fancies, AL¬ 
WAYS does despair result. 
And there is NO exception, nor will 
there ever be. 
The ONLY value that the past can hold is that you 
learn it gave you NO rewards that you would WANT to keep, for 
only thus will you be WILLING to relinquish it, and have it gone 
forever. 


T 25 C 2. 
Is it not strange that you should cherish still some hope of 
satisfaction from the world you see? In NO respect, at ANY time or 
place, has ANYTHING but fear and guilt been your reward. 
How 
long is needed for you to realize the chance of CHANGE in this re¬ 
gard is hardly worth delaying change that might result in better 
outcome? For one thing is sure; the way YOU see, and long HAVE 
seen, gives NO support to base your future hopes, and NO sugges¬ 
tions of success at all. 
To place your hopes where no hope lies MUST 
make you hopeless. 
Yet is this hopelessness your choice, while you 
would seek for hope where none is EVER found. 



796 October 5, 1967 


801 


1-791 



Volume I Text 


T 25 C 3. 
Is it not ALSO true that you have found some hope APART 
from this; some glimmering, inconstant, wavering, yet dimly seen, 
that hopefulness IS warranted, on grounds that are NOT in this 
world? And yet your hope that they may STILL lie here prevents 
you still from giving up the hopeless and unrewarding task you set 
YOURSELF. 
Can it make sense to hold the fixed belief that there IS 
reason to uphold pursuit of what has ALWAYS failed, on grounds 
that it will suddenly succeed, and bring what it has NEVER brought 
before? T(869) -688 797 

T 25 C 4. 
Its past HAS failed. 
Be glad that it is gone within your mind 
to darken what IS there. 
Take not the form for content, for the form 
is but a MEANS for content. 
And the frame is but a means to hold 
the picture up, so that it can be seen. 
A frame that HIDES the picture 
HAS no purpose. 
It cannot BE a frame if IT is what you see. 
WITH¬ 
OUT the picture is the frame without its meaning. 
Its PURPOSE is to 
set the PICTURE off, and NOT itself. 
Who hangs an empty frame 
upon a wall, and stands before it, deep in reverence, as if a master¬ 
piece were there to see? 

T 25 C 5. 
Yet, if you see your brother as a body, it IS but this you do. 

The masterpiece that God has set within this frame is all there IS to 
see. 
The body holds it, for a while, without obscuring it in any way. 

But what God has created NEEDS no frame, for what He has created 
HE supports, and frames within Himself. 
His masterpiece He offers 
YOU to see. 
And would you rather see the frame INSTEAD of this? 
And see the picture not at all? The Holy Spirit is the frame God set 
around the part of Him that YOU would see as separate. 
Yet its 
frame is JOINED to its Creator, One with Him AND with His mas¬ 
terpiece. 


T 25 C 6. 
This IS its purpose, and you do NOT make the frame INTO 
the picture, when you choose to see it in its place. 
The frame that 
God has given it but serves HIS purpose, not yours APART from 
His. 
It is your SEPARATE purpose that OBSCURES the picture, and 


797 Oct. 
8, 1967 


1-792 


802 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


cherishes the frame INSTEAD of it. 
But God has set His masterpiece 
within a frame that will endure forever, when yours has crumbled 
into dust. 
But think you not the picture is destroyed in ANY way. 

What God creates is safe from ALL corruption, unchanged and per¬ 
fect in eternity. 
T(870) -689 

T 25 C 7. 
Accept HIS frame instead of yours, and you WILL see the 
masterpiece. 
Look at its loveliness, and understand the Mind that 
thought it, NOT in flesh and bones, but in a frame as lovely as Itself. 

Its holiness lights up the sinlessness the frame of darkness hides, 
and casts a veil of light across the picture's face, which but reflects 
the light which shines from it to its Creator. 
Think not this face was 
ever darkened because YOU saw it in a frame of death. 
God kept it 
safe that YOU might look on it, and SEE the holiness that He has 
given it. 
Within the darkness see the Savior FROM the dark, and 
understand your brother as his Father's Mind shows him to you. 


T 25 C 8. 
He will step forth from darkness as you look on him, and 
YOU will see the dark no more. 
The darkness touched him not, nor 
you who BROUGHT him forth for YOU to look upon. 
His sinless¬ 
ness but pictures YOURS. 
His gentleness becomes YOUR strength, 
and BOTH will gladly look within and see the holiness that MUST 
be there BECAUSE of what you looked upon in him. 
HE is the 
frame in which YOUR holiness is set, and what God gave him 
MUST be given you. 
However much he overlooks the masterpiece 
in him, and sees only a frame of darkness, it is still YOUR only func¬ 
tion to behold in him what he sees not. 
And, in this seeing, is the 
vision SHARED that looks on Christ INSTEAD of seeing death. 


T 25 C 9. 
How could the Lord of Heaven NOT be glad if you appreci¬ 
ate His masterpiece? What COULD He do but offer thanks to you, 
who love His Son as He does? Would He not make KNOWN to you 
His Love, if you but SHARE His praise of what He loves? God cher¬ 
ishes T(87l) -690 creation as the perfect Father that He is. 
And so His 
joy is made complete when any part of Him JOINS in His praise, to 
SHARE His joy. 
This brother is His perfect gift to you. 
And He is 
glad and thankful when you thank His perfect Son for being what 


803 


1-793 


Volume I Text 


he IS. 
And ALL His thanks and gladness shine on you who would 
COMPLETE His joy, along with Him. 


T 25 C 10. 
And thus is YOURS completed. 
Not one ray of darkness 
can be seen by those who will to make their Father's happiness 
complete, and theirs along with His. 
The gratitude of God Himself is 
freely offered to everyone who shares His Purpose. 
It was not His 
Will to be alone. 
And neither is it YOURS. 
Forgive your brother, and 
you CANNOT separate yourself from him, nor from his Father. 


YOU need NO forgiveness, for the wholly pure have never sinned. 

Give, then, what He has given you, that YOU may see His Son as 
one, and thank his Father, as He thanks YOU. 
Nor believe that all 
His praise is given not to you. 
For what you give is HIS, and giving 
it, you learn to understand His gift to you. 
And give the Holy Spirit 
what He offers unto the Father AND the Son alike. 


T 25 C 11 . 
Nothing has power over you EXCEPT His Will AND yours, 
who but EXTEND His Will. 
It was for this YOU were created, and 
your brother WITH you, and ONE with you. 
YOU are the same, as 
God Himself is One, and NOT divided in His Will. 
And YOU must 
have one purpose, since He gave the same to BOTH of you. 
His Will 
is brought together as you join in will that you be made complete by 
offering completion to your brother. 
See not in him the sinfulness 
HE sees, but give him honor that you may esteem yourself AND 
him. 
To each of you is given the power of salvation, that escape 
from darkness into light be yours to share, T(872) -691 that you may 
see as one what never HAS been separate, nor apart from ALL His 
Love as given equally. 
T(873) -692 798 

T 25 D. 
The Fundamental Law of Perception (Notes 1754 
11:128) 

T 25 D 1. 
To the extent to which you value guilt, to that extent will 
you perceive a world in which attack is justified. 
To the extent to 
which you recognize that guilt is meaningless, to that extent will 
you perceive attack cannot BE justified. 
This is in strict accord with 


798 October 12, 1967 


1-794 


804 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


vision's FUNDAMENTAL law: You see what you believe is there, 
and you believe it there because you WANT it there. 
Perception 
HAS no other law than this. 
The rest but stem from this, to hold it 
up and offer it support. 
This is perception's form, adapted to this 
world, of God's more basic law; that Love creates Itself, and nothing 
BUT Itself. 


T 25 D 2. 
God's laws do not obtain directly to a world perception 
rules, for such a world could not have been created by the Mind to 
which perception has no meaning. 
Yet are His laws reflected every¬ 
where. 
NOT that the world where this reflection is, is real at all. 

ONLY because His Son BELIEVES it is, and from His Son's belief He 
COULD not let Himself be separate entirely. 
He could not enter His 
Son's insanity with him, but He could be sure His sanity went there 
WITH him, so he could not be lost forever in the madness of his 
wish. 


T 25 D 3. 
Perception rests on choosing; knowledge does not. 
Knowl¬ 
edge has but one law BECAUSE it has but One Creator. 
But this 
world has two who made it, and they do NOT see it as the same. 
To 
each it has a DIFFERENT purpose, and to each it is a perfect means 
to serve the goal for which it is perceived. 
For specialness it is the 
perfect frame to set it off; the perfect battleground to wage its wars, 
the perfect shelter for the illusions which it would make real. 
Not 
one but it upholds in its perception; not one but can be fully justi¬ 
fied. 


T 25 D 4. 
There is another Maker of the world, the simultaneous Cor¬ 
rector of the mad belief that ANYTHING could be established and 
maintained without some link that kept it still within the Laws of 
God. 
NOT as the Law Itself T(874) -693 upholds the universe as God 
created it. 
But in some form adapted to the need the Son of God be¬ 
lieves he has. 
Corrected error IS the error's end. 
And thus has God 
protected still His Son, even in error. 
There IS another purpose in 
the world that error made because it has another Maker, Who CAN 
reconcile its goal with His Creator's Purpose. 



805 


1-795 


Volume I Text 


T 25 D 5. 
In His perception of the world, nothing is seen but justifies 
forgiveness and the sight of perfect sinlessness. 
Nothing arises but is 
met with instant and complete forgiveness. 
Nothing remains an in¬ 
stant, to obscure the sinlessness that shines unchanged, beyond the 
pitiful attempts of specialness to put it out of mind, where it MUST 
be, and light the BODY up INSTEAD of it. 
The lamps of Heaven are 
NOT for it to choose to see them where it will. 
If it elects to see them 
elsewhere from their home, as if they lit a place where they could 
never be, AND YOU AGREE, then must the Maker of the world cor¬ 
rect your error, lest you still remain in darkness, where the lamps 
are NOT. 


T 25 D 6. 
Everyone here has entered darkness, yet no-one has entered 
it alone. 
Nor need he stay more than an instant. 
For he has come 
with Heaven's help within him, ready to lead him OUT of darkness 
into light at ANY time. 
The time he chooses can be ANY time, for 
help is there, awaiting but his choice. 
And when he chooses to 
AVAIL himself of what is given him, then will he see each situation 
that he thought before was means to justify his anger, turned to an 
event which justifies his love. 


T 25 D 7. 
He will hear plainly that the calls to war he heard before are 
really calls to peace. 
He will perceive that where he gave attack is 
but another altar where he can, with equal ease and FAR more hap¬ 
piness, bestow forgiveness. 
And he will re-interpret ALL temptation 
as just another chance to bring him joy. 
T(875) -694 How CAN a mis¬ 
perception be a sin? Let ALL your brother's errors be to you nothing 
except a chance for YOU to see the workings of the Helper given 
YOU to see the world HE made, instead of yours. 


T 25 D 8. 
What, then, is justified? WHAT DO YOU WANT? For these 
two questions ARE the same, and, when you see them AS the same, 
your choice is made. 
For it is SEEING them as one that brings re¬ 
lease from the belief there are two ways to see. 
This world has much 
to offer to your peace, and many chances to extend your own for¬ 
giveness. 
Such its PURPOSE is, to those who WANT to see peace 
and forgiveness descend on THEM, and offer THEM the light. 
The 


1-796 


806 


Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


Maker of the world of gentleness has perfect power to offset the 
world of violence and hate that SEEMS to stand BETWEEN you and 
His gentleness. 
It is not there in His forgiving eyes. 
And THERE¬ 
FORE it need not be there in yours. 


T 25 D 9. 
Sin is the fixed belief perception CANNOT change. 
What 
has been damned IS damned, and damned forever, BEING FOR¬ 
EVER UNFORGIVABLE. 
If, then, it IS forgiven, sin's perception 
MUST have been wrong. 
And thus is change made possible. 
The 
Holy Spirit, too, sees what HE sees as far beyond the chance of 
change. 
But on His Vision sin can NOT encroach. 
For sin HAS BEEN 
corrected by His sight. 
And thus IT MUST HAVE BEEN AN ER¬ 
ROR, NOT a sin. 
For what it claimed could never be, HAS BEEN. 


Sin is ATTACKED by punishment, and so PRESERVED. 
But to 
FORGIVE it is to change its state from error into truth. 


T 25 D to. 
The Son of God could NEVER sin, but he CAN wish for 
what would hurt him. 
And he HAS the power to think he CAN BE 
hurt. 
What could this be EXCEPT a misperception of himself? Is this 
a sin or a mistake; forgivable or not? Does he need help or condem¬ 
nation? Is it YOUR purpose that he be saved or damned? Forgetting 
not that what he is to YOU will make this T(876) -695 choice YOUR 
future. 
For you MAKE IT NOW, the instant when ALL time be¬ 
comes a means to reach a goal. 
Make, then, your choice, but recog¬ 
nize that, in this choice, the purpose of the world you see is chosen, 
and WILL be justified. 
T(877) -696 7 " 

T 25 E. 
The Joining of Minds (Notes 1762 11:137) 

T 25 E l. 
Minds that are joined, AND RECOGNIZE THEY ARE, can 
feel no guilt. 
For they can NOT attack, and they REJOICE that this is 
so, seeing their safety in this happy fact. 
Their joy is in the INNO¬ 
CENCE they see. 
And thus they seek for it, because it is their PUR¬ 
POSE to behold it and rejoice. 
Everyone seeks for what will bring 
him joy as he defines it. 
It is NOT the aim, as such, that varies. 
Yet it 
IS the way in which the aim is seen that makes the choice of means 


799 October 17, 1967 


807 


1-797 




Volume I Text 


inevitable, and beyond the hope of change UNLESS THE AIM IS 
CHANGED. 
And THEN the means are chosen once again, as what 
will bring rejoicing is defined ANOTHER way, and sought for dif¬ 
ferently. 


T 25 E 2. 
Perception's basic law could thus be said: "You will rejoice 
at what you see BECAUSE you see it TO rejoice." And, while you 
think that suffering and sin will bring you joy, so long will they be 
there for you to see. 
Nothing is harmful or beneficent APART from 
what you wish. 
It is your wish that MAKES it what it is in its effect 
on you, 800 BECAUSE you chose it as a means to GAIN these same 
effects, believing them to be the bringers of rejoicing and of joy. 


Even in Heaven does this law obtain. 
The Son of God creates to 
bring him joy, sharing his Father's purpose in his own creation, that 
his joy might be increased, and God's along with his. 
801 T(878) -697 802 
T 25 E 3. 
You makers of a world that is not so, take rest and comfort 
in another world where peace abides. 
This world you bring with 
you to all the weary eyes and tired hearts that look on sin and beat 
its sad refrain. 
From you can come their rest. 
From you can rise a 
world they will rejoice to look upon, and where their hearts are 
glad. 
In you there is a Vision which extends to all of them, and cov¬ 
ers them in gentleness and light. 
And in this widening world of light 
the darkness they THOUGHT was there is pushed away, until it is 
but distant shadows, far away, not long to be remembered, as the 
sun shines them to nothingness. 


T 25 E 4. 
And all their evil thoughts and sinful hopes, their dreams of 
guilt and merciless revenge, and every wish to hurt and kill and die. 



800 The Urtext manuscript, the HLC and FIP all put a sentence break here. 
The Notes doesn’t put a full 
stop here however and rather obviously the clause beginning with “BECAUSE” is a subordinate clause 
modifying the first clause and is not a stand-alone sentence. 
We consider the sentence break here to be 
a typo, one which went uncorrected in later editing, and restore the material to the original form in the 
Notes. 


801 John 15:11 “These things I have spoken to you, that My joy may remain in you, and that your joy 
may be complete.” 

John 16:24 “Until now you have asked nothing in My name. 
Ask, and you will receive, that your joy 
may be complete.” 

802 Oct. 
23, 1967 


1-798 


808 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


will disappear before the sun you bring. 
Would you not do this, for 
the Love of God? And for YOURSELF? For think what it would do 
for YOU. 
YOUR evil thoughts that haunt YOU now will seem in¬ 
creasingly remote, and far away from YOU. 
And they go farther and 
farther off, because the sun in you has risen that they may be 
pushed away before its light. 
They linger for a while, a LITTLE 
while, in twisted forms too far away for recognition, and are gone 
forever. 


T 25 E 5. 
And in the sunlight YOU will stand in quiet, in innocence 
and wholly unafraid. 
And from you will the rest YOU found extend, 
so that YOUR peace can never fall away, and leave YOU homeless. 

Those who offer peace to everyone have found a home in Heaven 
the world can NOT destroy. 
For it is large enough to hold the world 
within its peace. 
In YOU is all of Heaven; 803 every leaf that falls is 
given life in you. 
Each bird that ever sang will sing again in you. 

And every flower that ever bloomed has saved its perfume and its 
loveliness for you. 
T(879) -698 

T 25 E 6. 
What aim can supersede the Will of God and of His Son, that 
Heaven be restored to him for whom it was created as his ONLY 
home? Nothing before and nothing after it. 
No other place, no other 
state nor time. 
Nothing beyond nor nearer. 
Nothing else. 
In ANY 
form. 
This can YOU bring to ALL the world, and ALL the thoughts 
that entered it, and were mistaken for a little while. 
How better 
could your OWN mistakes be brought to truth than by your will¬ 
ingness to bring the light of Heaven with you, as you walk BE¬ 
YOND the world of darkness into light? T(880) -699 804 

T 25 F. 
The State of Sinlessness (Notes 1766 11:141) 

T 25 F l. 
The state of sinlessness is merely this: The WHOLE desire to 
attack is gone, and so there is no reason to perceive the Son of God 
as other than he is. 
The NEED for guilt is gone, because it has no 


803 Luke 17:21 “Nor will they say, ‘see here!’ or ‘see there!’ For indeed, the kingdom of God is within 
you.” 

804 October 29, 1967 


809 


1-799 



Volume I Text 


purpose, and is meaningless without the goal of sin. 
Attack and sin 
are bound as ONE illusion, each the cause and aim and JUSTIFIER 
of the other. 
Each is meaningless alone, but SEEMS to draw a mean¬ 
ing from the other. 
Each depends upon the other for whatever sense 
it seems to have. 
And no-one COULD believe in one unless the 
other were the truth, 805 for each attests the other MUST be true. 


T 25 F 2. 
Attack makes Christ your enemy, and God along with Him. 

MUST you not be afraid, with enemies like these? And must you not 
be fearful of YOURSELF? For you HAVE hurt yourself, and made 
your Self your enemy. 
And now you MUST believe you are not you, 
but something alien to yourself and "something else," a "some¬ 
thing" to be feared instead of loved. 
Who would attack whatever he 
sees as wholly innocent? And who, BECAUSE he wishes to attack, 
can FAIL to think it MUST be guilty, to DESERVE the wish and 
leave HIM innocent? And who would see the Son of God as inno¬ 
cent, and wish him dead? 

T 25 F 3. 
Christ stands before you both, each time you look on one 
another. 
He has NOT gone because your eyes are closed. 
But what is 
there to see by searching for your Savior, seeing Him through sight¬ 
less eyes? It is NOT Christ you see by looking thus. 
It is the enemy, 
CONFUSED with Christ, you look upon. 
And HATE BECAUSE 
there is no sin in him for you to see. 
Nor do you hear his plaintive 
call, unchanged in content in WHATEVER form the call is made, 
that you UNITE with him, and JOIN with him T(881) -700 in inno¬ 
cence and peace. 
And yet, beneath the ego's senseless shrieks, such 
IS the Call that God has given him, that YOU might hear in him His 
Call to YOU, and answer by returning unto God what is His own. 
806 


805 The Notes does not contain this paragraph, so we cannot check to see if the full stop found in the 
Urtext manuscript at this point was a copying mistake. 
However, rather clearly we have a subordinate 
clause modifying the preceding clause and not a separate sentence, so the full stop in the Urtext is 
replaced with a comma here. 
The fact that the last paragraph of the previous section and the paragraph 
following this one appear in the Notes with nothing in between but two blank lines is further evidence 
that this page of the Urtext at least is not a direct transcript of the Notes but rather a later re-typing in 
which this paragraph, apparently “dictated without notes” was interpolated. 


806 Matthew 22:21 They said to Him, “Caesar’s.” And He said to them, “Render therefore to Caesar the 
things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” 


1-800 


810 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


T 25 F 4. 
The Son of God asks only this of you; that you return to him 
what is his due, that you may SHARE in it with him. 
Alone, does 
NEITHER have it. 
So must it remain useless to both. 
Together, it will 
give to each an EQUAL strength to save the other, and save himself 
along WITH him. 
FORGIVEN by you, your Savior offers YOU sal¬ 
vation. 
CONDEMNED by you, he offers death to you. 
In everyone 
you see but the reflection of what you chose to have HIM be to you. 

If you decide against his proper function, the ONLY one he really 
has in truth, you are depriving him of all the joy he WOULD have 
found if he fulfilled the role God gave to him. 
But think not Heaven 
is lost to him alone. 
Nor can it be regained unless the way is shown 
to him through YOU, that YOU may find it, walking by his side. 


T 25 F 5. 
It is no sacrifice that he be saved, for BY his freedom will you 
gain your own. 
To let HIS function be fulfilled is but the means to 
let YOURS be. 
And so you walk toward Heaven or toward hell, but 
NOT alone. 
How beautiful his sinlessness will be, when you per¬ 
ceive it! And how great will be YOUR joy when he is free to offer 
you the gift of sight God gave to him for you. 
He HAS no need but 
this; that you allow him freedom to complete the task God gave to 
him. 
Remembering but this; that what HE does YOU do, along with 
him. 
And AS you see him, so do YOU define T(882) -701 the function 
he will have for you, until you see him differently, and LET him be 
what God APPOINTED that he be to you. 


T 25 F 6. 
Against the hatred that the Son of God may cherish toward 
himself is God believed to be without the power to save what He 
created from the pain of hell. 
But in the love he shows himself is 
God made free to LET His Will be done. 
In each of you, you see the 
picture of your OWN belief of 807 what the Will of God MUST be for 
you. 
In YOUR forgiveness will you understand His Love for you. 

Through your ATTACK, believe He hates you, thinking Heaven 
must be hell. 
Look once again upon your brother, NOT without the 


sn7 The HLC changes the word “of’ here to "in” which does better reflect common English usage. 
It is 
very clearly “of’ in both the Notes and the Urtext manuscripts, however, and given this segment is 
intensely poetic in structure, it may well be that the uncommon, but not incorrect usage was intentional. 



811 


1-801 



Volume I Text 


understanding that he is the way to Heaven or to hell, as YOU per¬ 
ceive him. 
But forget not this; the role you give to him is given YOU, 
and YOU will walk the way you pointed out to him, BECAUSE it is 
your judgment made upon 808 yourself. 
T(883) -702 809 

T 25 G. 
The Special Function (Notes 1770 11:145) 

T 25 G 1 . 
The grace of God rests gently on forgiving eyes, and every¬ 
thing they look on speaks of Him to the beholder. 
He can see no 
evil; nothing in the world to fear, and no-one who is different from 
himself. 
And, as he loves them, so he looks upon HIMSELF with 
love and gentleness. 
He would no more condemn himself for HIS 
mistakes than damn another. 
He is not an arbiter of vengeance, nor 
a punisher of sin. 
The kindness of his sight rests on himself with all 
the tenderness it offers others. 
For he would ONLY heal and ONLY 
bless. 
And, being IN ACCORD with what God wills, he HAS the 
power to heal and bless all those he looks on with the grace of God 
upon his sight. 


T 25 G 2. 
Eyes become used to darkness, and the light of brilliant day 
seems painful to the eyes grown long accustomed to the dim effects 
perceived at twilight. 
And they turn away from sunlight, and the 
clarity it brings to what they look upon. 
Dimness seems better; eas¬ 
ier to see, and better recognized. 
Somehow, the vague and more ob¬ 
scure seems EASIER to look upon; LESS painful to the eyes than 
what is wholly clear and unambiguous. 
Yet this is NOT what eyes 
are FOR. 
And who can say that he PREFERS the darkness, and 
maintain he WANTS to see? 

T 25 G 3. 
The WISH to see calls down the grace of God upon your 
eyes, and brings the gift of light that makes sight possible. 
Will you 
behold your brother? God is glad to have you look on him. 
He does 
not will your Savior be unrecognized by you. 
Nor does He will that 
he remain without the function that He gave to him. 
Let him no 


8 Urtext manuscript has it typed “made on yourself’ which is also what the Notes suggests, the “on” 
was crossed out by hand and “made upon” written in by hand. 


809 Nov. 
3, 1967 


1-802 


812 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


more be lonely, for the lonely ones are those who see no function in 
the world for them to fill; no place where they are needed, and no 
aim which ONLY they can perfectly fulfill. 
T(884) -703 

T 25 G 4. 
Such is the Holy Spirit's kind perception of specialness; His 
use of what you made, to heal INSTEAD of harm. 
To each He gives 
a special function in salvation he alone can fill; a part for ONLY him. 

Nor is the plan complete until he finds his special function, and ful¬ 
fills the part assigned to him, to make himself complete within a 
world where incompletion rules. 
Here, where the laws of God do 
NOT prevail in perfect form, can he yet do ONE perfect thing, and 
make ONE perfect choice. 
And, BY this act of special faithfulness, to 
one perceived as OTHER than himself, he learns the gift was given 
TO himself, and so they MUST be one. 


T 25 G 5. 
Forgiveness is the ONLY function meaningful in time. 
It is 
the means the Holy Spirit uses to TRANSLATE specialness from sin 
into salvation. 
Forgiveness is for all. 
But, when it RESTS on all, it is 
complete, and every function of this world completed with it. 
Then 
is time no more. 
But WHILE in time, there is still much to do. 
And 
each must do what is allotted him, for, on HIS part, does ALL the 
plan depend. 
He HAS a special part in time, for so he chose, and 
choosing it, made it for himself. 
His wish was not denied, but 
changed in form, to let it serve his brother AND himself, and thus 
become a means to save INSTEAD of lose. 


T 25 G 6. 
Salvation is no more than a reminder this world is NOT 
your home; its laws are NOT imposed on you, its values are NOT 
yours. 
And nothing that you THINK you see in it is REALLY there 
at all. 
And this is seen AND UNDERSTOOD as each one takes his 
part in its UNDOING, as he did in MAKING it. 
He HAS the means 
for either, as he always did. 
The specialness he chose to HURT him¬ 
self did God appoint to be the means for his salvation, from the very 
instant that the choice was made. 
His special sin was made his spe¬ 
cial grace. 
His special hate became his special love. 
T(885) -704 

T 25 G 7. 
The Holy Spirit needs YOUR special function, that HIS may 
be fulfilled. 
Think not you lack a special value here. 
You wanted it. 



813 


1-803 


Volume I Text 


and it IS given you. 
ALL that you made can serve salvation easily 
and well. 
The Son of God can make NO choice the Holy Spirit can 
not employ on his BEHALF, and NOT against himself. 
Only in 
darkness does your specialness APPEAR to be attack. 
In light, you 
see it is your SPECIAL FUNCTION in the plan to save the Son of 
God from ALL attack, and let him understand that he is safe, as he 
has ALWAYS been, and will remain in time and in eternity alike. 

This is the function given each of you for one another. 
Take it gen¬ 
tly, then, from one another's hand, and let salvation be perfectly ful¬ 
filled in BOTH of you. 
Do this ONE thing, that EVERYTHING be 
given you. 
T(886) -705 810 

T 25 H. 
Commuting the Sentence (Notes 1775 11:150) 

T 25 H l. 
And, if the Holy Spirit can commute each sentence that you 
laid upon yourself into a blessing, then it CANNOT be a sin. 
Sin is 
ONE thing in all this world that CANNOT change. 
It is immutable. 

And ON its changelessness the world depends. 
The magic of the 
world can SEEM to hide the pain of sin from sinners, and deceive 
with glitter and with guile. 
Yet each one knows the cost of sin is 
death. 
811 And so it IS. 
For sin is a REQUEST for death, a wish to 
make this world's foundation sure as love, dependable as Heaven, 
and as strong as God Himself. 
The world IS safe from love to every¬ 
one who thinks sin possible. 
Nor WILL it change. 


T 25 H 2. 
Yet IS it possible what God created NOT should SHARE the 
attributes of His creation, when it OPPOSES it in every way? It 
CANNOT be the "sinner's" wish for death is just as strong as is His 
Will for Life. 
Nor CAN the basis of a world He did NOT make be 
firm and sure as Heaven. 
How COULD it be that hell and Heaven 
are the same? And is it possible that what He did NOT will can 
NOT be changed? What is immutable BESIDES His Will? And what 


810 November 9, 1967 

811 Romans 6:23 For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 



1-804 


814 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 

can share Its attributes EXCEPT Itself? What wish can rise 
AGAINST His Will, and BE immutable? 

T 25 H 3. 
If you could realize NOTHING is changeless BUT the Will 
of God, this course would not be difficult for you. 
For it is this that 
you do not believe. 
Yet there is nothing ELSE you COULD believe, if 
you but looked at what it really IS. 
Let us go back to what we said 
before, and think of it more carefully. 
It MUST be so that either God 
is mad, or is this world a place of madness. 
Not ONE Thought of 
His makes ANY sense at all within this world. 
And NOTHING that 

the world believes as true has ANY meaning in His Mind at all. 


T(887) -706 

T 25 H 4. 
What makes no sense and has no meaning IS insanity. 
And 
what is madness CANNOT be the truth. 
If ONE belief so deeply val¬ 
ued here were true, then every Thought God ever had is an illusion. 

And if but ONE Thought of His is true, then ALL beliefs the world 
gives ANY meaning to are false, and make no sense at all. 
This IS 
the choice you make. 
Do not attempt to see it differently, nor twist it 
into something it is not. 
For only THIS decision CAN you make. 
The 
rest is up to God, and NOT to you. 


T 25 H 5. 
To justify ONE value that the world upholds is to DENY 
your Father's sanity AND YOURS. 
For God and His beloved Son do 
NOT think differently. 
812 And it is the AGREEMENT of their 
Thought that makes the Son a co-creator with the Mind Whose 
Thought created him. 
And if he chooses to believe ONE thought 
OPPOSED to truth, he has decided he is NOT his Father's Son, be¬ 
cause the Son is mad, and sanity must lie apart from both the Father 
AND the Son. 
THIS YOU BELIEVE. 
Think not that this belief de¬ 
pends upon the form it takes. 
Who thinks the world is sane in any 
way; is justified in ANYTHING it thinks, or is maintained by ANY 
form of reason, believes this to be true. 


T 25 H 6. 
Sin is not real BECAUSE the Father and the Son are NOT 
insane. 
This world is meaningless BECAUSE it rests on sin. 
Who 


812 John 10:30 “I and the Father are one.” 


815 


1-805 



Volume I Text 


could create the changeless, if it does NOT rest on truth? The Holy 
Spirit HAS the power to change the whole foundation of the world 
you see to something else; a basis NOT insane, on which a sane per¬ 
ception can be based, another world perceived. 
And one in which is 
nothing contradicted that would lead the Son of God to sanity and 
joy. 
Nothing attests to death and cruelty; to separation and to differ¬ 
ences. 
For here is everything perceived as one, and no-one loses, 
that each one may gain. 
T(888) -707 

T 25 H 7. 
Test EVERYTHING that you believe against this ONE re¬ 
quirement. 
And understand that everything that meets this ONE 
demand is worthy of your faith. 
But nothing else. 
What is not love is 
sin, and either one perceives the other as insane and meaningless. 

Love is the basis for a world perceived as wholly mad to sinners, 
who believe theirs is the way to sanity. 
But sin is equally insane 
within the sight of love, whose gentle eyes would look BEYOND the 
madness, and rest peacefully on truth. 
Each sees a world immutable, 
as each defines the changeless and eternal truth of what YOU are. 

And each reflects a view of what the Father and the Son MUST be, 
to make that viewpoint meaningful and sane. 


T 25 H 8. 
Your special function is the special form in which the fact 
that God is NOT insane appears most sensible and meaningful to 
you. 
The CONTENT is the same. 
Tire FORM is suited to your special 
needs, and to the special time and place in which you think you find 
yourself, and where you can be free of place and time, and ALL that 
you believe must limit you. 
The Son of God can NOT be bound by 813 
time or place, or anything God did NOT will. 
Yet, if His Will is seen 
as madness, then the FORM of sanity which makes it most accept¬ 
able to those who ARE insane requires special choice. 
Nor CAN this 
choice be made BY the insane, whose problem IS their choices are 
NOT free, and made with reason in the light of sense. 



813 The Urtext manuscript has “in” originally typed, crossed out and replaced with “by” in handwritten 
mark-up. 
The Notes has the glyph for “to” here, making it “be bound to time or place” originally. 



1-806 


816 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


T 25 H 9. 
It WOULD be madness to entrust salvation to the insane. 

BECAUSE He is not mad, has God appointed One as sane as He to 
raise a saner world to meet the sight of everyone who chose insanity 
as his salvation. 
To this One is given the choice of form most suit¬ 
able to him; one which will NOT attack the world he sees, but enter 
into it in quietness, and SHOW him it is mad. 
This One but points to 
an ALTERNATIVE, ANOTHER way of looking at what he has seen 
before, and recognizes as the world in which he lives, and 
THOUGHT he understood before. 
Now MUST he question this, be¬ 
cause the T(889) -708 form of the alternative is one which he can NOT 
deny, nor overlook, nor fail completely to perceive and see at all. 


T 25 H to. 
To each his special function is designed to be perceived as 
possible, and more and more desired, as it PROVES to him that it is 
an alternative he WANTS. 
From this position does his sinfulness, 
and ALL the sin he sees within the world, offer him less and less. 

Until he comes to understand it COST him sanity, and stands BE¬ 
TWEEN him and whatever hope he has of BEING sane. 
Nor is he 
left without ESCAPE from madness, for he has a special part in 
EVERYONE'S escape. 
He can no more be left outside, WITHOUT a 
special function in the hope of peace, than could the Father overlook 
His Son, and pass him by in careless thoughtlessness. 


T 25 H ll. 
What is dependable EXCEPT His Love? And where does 
sanity abide EXCEPT in Him? The One Who speaks for Him can 
show you this, in the alternative He chose especially for you. 
It is 
God's Will that you remember this, and so emerge from deepest 
mourning into perfect joy. 
Accept the function that has been as¬ 
signed to you in God's Own plan to show His Son that hell and 
Heaven are different; NOT the same. 
But that, in Heaven THEY are 
all the same, WITHOUT the differences that WOULD have made a 
hell of Heaven, and a heaven of hell, had such insanity been possi¬ 
ble. 


T 25 H12. 
The whole belief that someone loses but reflects the under¬ 
lying tenet God must be insane. 
For in this world it seems that one 
must gain BECAUSE another loses. 
If THIS were true, then God is 


817 


1-807 


Volume I Text 


mad indeed. 
But what IS this belief, except a form of the more basic 
tenet, "Sin is real, and rules the world?" For every little gain, must 
someone lose, and pay exact amount in blood and suffering. 
For 
otherwise would evil triumph, and destruction be the total cost of 
any gain at all. 
You who believe that God is mad, look carefully at 
this, and understand that it MUST be that EITHER God OR this 
must T(890) -709 be insane, but hardly both. 


T 25 H 13. 
Salvation is rebirth of the idea no-one CAN lose for ANY¬ 
ONE to gain. 
And everyone MUST gain, if anyone WOULD BE a 
gainer. 
Here is sanity restored. 
814 And on this single rock of truth 
can faith in God's eternal saneness rest, in perfect confidence and 
perfect peace. 
Reason is satisfied, for ALL insane beliefs can be cor¬ 
rected here. 
And sin MUST be impossible, if TFIIS is true. 
This is the 
rock on which salvation rests; 815 the vantage point from which the 
Floly Spirit gives meaning and direction to the plan in which your 
special function has a part. 
For here your special function is made 
whole, because it shares the FUNCTION of the whole. 


T 25 H 14. 
Remember ALL temptation is but this; a mad belief that 
God's insanity would make YOU sane, and GIVE you what you 
want. 
That either God OR you must LOSE to madness, because your 
aims can NOT be reconciled. 
Death demands life, but life is NOT 
maintained at ANY cost. 
No-one CAN suffer for the Will of God to 
be fulfilled. 
Salvation IS Elis Will BECAUSE you share it. 
NOT for 
you alone, but for the Self which IS the Son of God. 
Fie CANNOT 
lose, for if he could, the loss would be his Father's, and in Him NO 
loss is possible. 
And this is sane BECAUSE it is the truth. 
T(89l) -710 816 

T 25 I. 
The Principle of Salvation (Notes 1785 11:160) 

T 25 11 . 
The Holy Spirit can use ALL that you give to Him for your 
salvation. 
But He CANNOT use what you withhold. 
For He can 


814 The Urtext manuscript has a comma, but the following word “And” is capitalized. 
The Notes has a 
full stop here so we’re thinking this comma wasa typo which was meant to be a period. 


815 Matthew 16:18 “And I also say to you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build My church, 
and the gates of Hades shall not prevail against it.” 

816 November 13, 1967 


1-808 


818 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


NOT take it from you, WITHOUT your willingness. 
For, if He did, 
you would believe He wrested it from you AGAINST your will. 


And so you would not learn it IS your will to be without it. 
You 
need not give it to Him WHOLLY willingly, for if you could, you 
had 817 no need for Him. 
But this He needs; that you PREFER He take 
it, than that you keep it for yourself alone, and recognize that what 
brings loss to no-one YOU WOULD NOT KNOW. 
This much is nec¬ 
essary to add to the idea no-one CAN lose for you to gain. 
And 
nothing more. 


T 251 2 . 
Here is the ONLY principle salvation needs. 
Nor is it neces¬ 
sary that your faith in it be strong, unswerving, and without attack 
from all beliefs opposed to it. 
You HAVE no fixed allegiance. 
But 
remember salvation is not needed by the saved. 
You are NOT called 
upon to do what one divided still against himself WOULD find im¬ 
possible. 
818 Have little faith that wisdom COULD be found in such a 
state of mind. 
But be you thankful that only little faith is ASKED of 
you. 
819 What BUT a little faith remains to those who still believe in 
sin? What COULD they know of Heaven and the justice of the 
saved? 

T 25 13. 
There is a kind of justice in salvation of which the world 
knows nothing. 
To the world, justice and VENGEANCE are the 
same, for sinners see justice ONLY as their punishment, perhaps 
sustained by someone ELSE, but NOT escaped. 
The laws of sin 
DEMAND a victim. 
WHO it may be makes little difference. 
But 
death MUST be the cost and MUST be paid. 
This is NOT justice, but 
insanity. 
Yet how could justice BE defined WITHOUT insanity, 
where love means hate, and death is seen as victory and triumph 
over eternity and timelessness and life? 


817 Subjunctive mood, not a tense error. 
The reading in the Notes is identical. 


818 Matthew 12:25 But Jesus knew their thoughts, and said to them: “Every kingdom divided against 
itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.” 

819 Matthew 17:20 So Jesus said to them, “Because of your unbelief; for assuredly, I say to you, if you 
have faith as a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move; 
and nothing will be impossible for you.” 


819 


1-809 



Volume I Text 


T 25 14. 
You who know not of justice still can ask, and learn the an¬ 
swer. 
Justice looks on all in the same way. 
It is NOT just that one 
should lack for what another has. 
For that is vengeance, in WHAT¬ 
EVER form it takes. 
Justice demands NO sacrifice, for ANY sacrifice 
is made that sin MAY BE PRESERVED and KEPT. 
T(892) -711 It is a 
payment offered for the cost of sin, BUT NOT THE TOTAL COST. 

The rest is taken from another, to be laid beside your LITTLE pay¬ 
ment, to "atone" for all that you would keep and NOT give up. 
So is 
the victim seen as PARTLY you, with someone ELSE by far the 
greater part. 
And in the TOTAL cost, the greater his, the less is 
yours. 
And justice, being blind, is satisfied by being paid, it matters 
not by whom. 


T 2515. 
Can this BE justice? God knows not of this. 
But justice DOES 
He know, and knows it well. 
For He is wholly fair to everyone. 

Vengeance is alien to His Mind BECAUSE He knows of justice. 
820 To 
be just is to be fair, AND NOT be vengeful. 
Fairness AND venge¬ 
ance are impossible, for each one contradicts the other, and denies 
that it is real. 
It is impossible for you to SHARE the Holy Spirit's jus¬ 
tice, with a mind that can conceive of specialness at all. 
Yet how 
could HE be just, if He condemns a sinner for the crimes he did not 
do, but THINKS he did? And where would justice be if He de¬ 
manded of the ones obsessed with the idea of punishment that they 
lay it aside, unaided, and perceive it is not true? 

T 25 16 . 
It is extremely hard for those who still believe sin meaningful 
to understand the Holy Spirit's justice. 
They believe He shares their 
OWN confusion, and can NOT avoid the vengeance that their own 
belief in justice MUST entail. 
And so they fear the Holy Spirit, and 
perceive the wrath of God in Him. 
They are unjust indeed to Him. 

Nor can they trust Him NOT to strike them dead with lightening 


820 Deuteronomy 32:35 Vengeance is Mine, and recompense; Their foot shall slip in due time; For the 
day of their calamity is at hand, And the things to come hasten upon them. 


Romans 12:19 Beloved, do not avenge yourselves, but rather give place to wrath; for it is written, 
“Vengeance is Mine, I will repay,” says the Lord. 



1-810 


820 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


bolts torn from the fires of Heaven by God's Own angry hand. 
821 
They DO believe that Heaven is hell, and ARE afraid of love. 
And 
deep suspicion and the chill of fear come over them when they are 
told that they have NEVER sinned. 
Their world DEPENDS on sin's 
stability. 
And they perceive the "threat" of what God KNOWS as 
justice to be more destructive to themselves and to their world than 
vengeance, which they understand and love. 
T(893) -712 

T 2517. 
So do they think the LOSS of sin a curse. 
And flee the bless¬ 
ing of the Holy Spirit as if He were a messenger from hell, sent from 
above in treachery and guile, to work God's vengeance on them in 
the guise of a deliverer and friend. 
What COULD He be to them ex¬ 
cept a devil dressed to deceive, within an angel's cloak? And what 
escape has He for them, except a door to hell that SEEMS to look 
like Heaven's gate? 822 Yet justice cannot punish those who ask for 
punishment, but have a Judge Who knows that they are wholly in¬ 
nocent in truth. 
In justice He is BOUND to set them free, and GIVE 
them all the honor they deserve, and have denied themselves be¬ 
cause they are NOT fair, and CANNOT understand that they ARE 
innocent. 


T 25 18 . 
Love is NOT understandable to sinners. 
BECAUSE they 
think that justice is SPLIT OFF from love, and stands for something 
else. 
And thus is love perceived as weak and vengeance strong. 
For 
love has LOST when judgment left its side, and is too weak to SAVE 
from punishment. 
But vengeance WITHOUT love has GAINED in 
strength by being separate and apart from love. 
And what BUT 
vengeance now can help and save, while love stands feebly by, with 
helpless hands, bereft of justice and vitality, and powerless to save? 
What can Love ask of you who think that all of this is true? Could 


821 Psalm 18:13-14 The LORD thundered from heaven, And the Most High uttered His voice. 

Hailstones and coals of fire. 
He sent out His arrows and scattered the foe, Lightnings in abundance, and 
He vanquished them. 


Psalm 144:6-7 Flash forth lightning and scatter them; Shoot out Your arrows and destroy them. 
Stretch 
out Your hand from above; Rescue me and deliver me out of great waters, From the hand of foreigners, 

822 Genesis 28:17 And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none other than the 
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!” 


821 


1-811 



Volume I Text 


He, in justice AND in love believe in your confusion you HAVE 
much to give? 

T 25 19. 
You are NOT asked to trust Him far. 
No further than what 
you SEE He offers you, and what you recognize you COULD not 
give yourself. 
In God's Own justice does He recognize all you de¬ 
serve, but understands as well that you can NOT accept it for your¬ 
self. 
It is His Special Function to hold out to you the gifts the inno¬ 
cent DESERVE. 
And every one that you accept brings joy to Him AS 
WELL as you. 
He knows that Heaven is richer made by each one 
you accept. 
And God rejoices as His Son receives what loving justice 
KNOWS to be his due. 
For love and justice are NOT different. 
BE¬ 
CAUSE they are the same, does mercy stand at God's right Hand, 
and GIVE the Son of God T(894) -713 the power to forgive HIMSELF 
of sin. 
823 

T 25110 . 
To him who merits EVERYTHING, how can it be that ANY¬ 
THING is kept FROM him? For that would be injustice, and unfair 
indeed to all the holiness that IS in him, however much he recognize 
it not. 
God knows of NO injustice. 
He would not allow His Son be 
judged by those who seek his death, and COULD not see his worth 
at all. 
What honest witnesses could THEY call forth, to speak on his 
behalf? And who would come to plead FOR him, and not AGAINST 
his life? No justice would be given him by you. 
Yet God ensured 
that justice WOULD be done unto the Son He loves, and would pro¬ 
tect from ALL unfairness you might seek to offer, believing venge¬ 
ance IS his proper due. 
T(895) -714 824 

T 25111 . 
As specialness cares not who pays the cost of sin, so it BE 
paid, the Holy Spirit heeds not who looks on innocence at last, pro¬ 
vided it IS seen and recognized. 
For just ONE witness is enough, if 


823 Psalm 110:1 The LORD said to my Lord, “Sit at My right hand. 
Till I make Your enemies Your 
footstool.” 

Mark 16:19 So then, after the Lord had spoken to them, He was received up into heaven, and sat down 
at the right hand of God. 


Matthew 9:6 “But that you may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins”—then 
He said to the paralytic, “Arise, take up your bed, and go to your house.” 

824 November 14, 1967 


1-812 


822 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


he sees truly. 
Simple justice asks no more. 
Of each one does the 
Holy Spirit ask if he will be that one, so justice may return to love, 
and there be satisfied. 
Each special function He allots is but for this; 
that each one learn that love and justice are NOT separate. 
And both 
are strengthened by their union with each other. 
Without love is jus¬ 
tice prejudiced and weak. 
And love WITHOUT justice is impossible. 

For love is fair, and cannot chasten without cause. 
What cause can 
BE to warrant an attack upon the innocent? In justice, then, does 
love correct mistakes, but NOT in vengeance. 
For that would be un¬ 
just to innocence. 


T 25112. 
You can be perfect witness to the power of love AND jus¬ 
tice, if you understand it is impossible the Son of God COULD merit 
vengeance. 
You need NOT perceive, in every circumstance, that this 
is true. 
Nor need you look to your experience WITHIN the world, 
which is but shadows of all that is REALLY happening within your¬ 
self. 
The understanding that you need comes NOT of you, but from 
a larger Self, so great and holy that He COULD not doubt His inno¬ 
cence. 
Your special function is a call to Him, that He may smile on 
you whose sinlessness He shares. 
HIS understanding will be 
YOURS. 
And so the Holy Spirit's Special Function has been fulfilled. 

God's Son has found a witness unto his sinlessness, and NOT his 
sin. 
How LITTLE need you give the Holy Spirit, that simple justice 
may be given YOU. 


T 25113. 
Without impartiality there IS no justice. 
How CAN special¬ 
ness be just? Judge not because you cannot, NOT because you are a 
miserable sinner too . 
825 T(896) -715 How can the special REALLY un¬ 
derstand that justice is the same for everyone? To take from one to 
give another MUST be an injustice to them both, since they are equal 
in the Holy Spirit's sight. 
Their Father gave the SAME inheritance to 
both. 
Who would have more OR less is not aware that he has every¬ 
thing. 
He is no judge of what MUST be another's due, because he 
thinks HE is deprived. 
And so MUST he be envious, and try to 


8:3 Matthew 7:1 “Judge not, that you be not judged.” 


823 


1-813 



Volume I Text 


TAKE AWAY from whom he judges. 
He is NOT impartial, and 
CANNOT fairly see another's rights BECAUSE his own have been 
obscured to him. 


T 25114. 
You have the right to all the universe; to perfect peace, com¬ 
plete deliverance from ALL effects of sin, and to the life eternal, joy¬ 
ous, and complete in EVERY way, as God appointed for His holy 
Son. 
This is the ONLY justice Heaven knows, and all the Holy Spirit 
brings to earth. 
Your special function shows you nothing else BUT 
perfect justice CAN prevail for you. 
And you ARE safe from venge¬ 
ance in ALL forms. 
The world deceives, but it can NOT replace 
God's justice with a version of its own. 
For only love IS just, and 
CAN perceive what justice must accord the Son of God. 
Let love de¬ 
cide, and never fear that you, in your unfairness, will deprive your¬ 
self of what GOD's justice has allotted you. 
T(897) -716 826 

T 25 J. 
The Justice of Heaven (Notes 1796 11:171) 

T 25 J 1 . 
What can it be but arrogance to think your little errors 
CANNOT be undone by Heaven's justice? And what COULD this 
mean, except that they are sins, and NOT mistakes, forever uncor- 
rectable, and to be met with vengeance, NOT with justice? ARE you 
willing to be released from ALL effects of sin? You CANNOT an¬ 
swer this until you see all that the answer MUST entail. 
For if you 
answer "yes," this means you will forego ALL values of this world, 
in favor of the peace of Heaven. 
Not one sin would you retain. 
AND 
NOT ONE DOUBT THAT THIS IS POSSIBLE will you hold dear, 
that sin be kept in place. 
You mean that truth has greater value now 
than ALL illusions. 
And you recognize that truth must be RE¬ 
VEALED to you, because YOU know not what it IS. 


T 25 J 2. 
To give reluctantly is not to gain the gift. 
BECAUSE YOU 
ARE RELUCTANT TO ACCEPT IT. 
It IS saved for you, until reluc¬ 
tance to receive it disappears, and you are WILLING it be given 
you. 
God's justice warrants gratitude, NOT fear. 
Nothing you give 
is lost to you or anyone, but cherished and preserved for you in 


826 November 21, 1967 


1-814 


824 



Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


Heaven, where all the treasures given to God's Son are kept for him, 
and offered anyone who but holds out his hand in willingness they 
be received . 
827 Nor is the treasure LESS as it is given out. 
Each gift 
received but ADDS to the supply. 
For God IS fair. 
He does not fight 
AGAINST His Son's reluctance to perceive salvation as a gift from 
Him. 
Yet would His justice not be satisfied until it is received by 
everyone. 


T 25 J 3. 
Be certain any answer to a problem the Holy Spirit solves 
will ALWAYS be one in which NO-ONE loses. 
And this MUST be 
true BECAUSE He asks no sacrifice of anyone. 
An answer which 
demands the slightest loss to ANYONE has not RESOLVED the 
problem, but has added TO it, and made it greater, HARDER to re¬ 
solve, AND MORE UNFAIR. 
It is impossible the Holy Spirit could 
SEE unfairness as a resolution. 
To Him, what is unfair must be cor¬ 
rected BECAUSE it is unfair. 
And EVERY error is a perception in 
which one, at least, is seen unfairly. 
Thus is justice NOT accorded to 
the Son of God. 
When ANYONE T(898) -717 is seen as losing, HE HAS 
BEEN CONDEMNED. 
And punishment becomes his due, IN¬ 
STEAD of justice. 


T 25 J 4. 
The sight of innocence makes punishment impossible, and 
justice sure. 
The Holy Spirit's perception leaves no GROUNDS for 
an attack. 
Only a LOSS could justify attack, and loss of ANY kind 
He cannot see. 
The world solves problems in another way. 
IT sees a 
resolution as a state in which it is DECIDED who shall win and who 
shall lose; HOW MUCH the one shall take, and HOW MUCH can 
the loser still defend. 
Yet does the problem still remain unsolved, for 
ONLY justice can set up a state in which there IS no loser; no-one 
left unfairly treated and deprived, and thus with grounds for 
vengeance. 
Problem SOLVING can NOT be vengeance, which at 
best can bring another problem ADDED to the first, in which the 
murder is not obvious. 



8 7 Matthew 6:20 “but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys 
and where thieves do not break in and steal.” 


825 


1-815 



Volume I Text 


T 25 J 5. 
The Holy Spirit's problem solving is the way in which the 
problem ENDS. 
It has been solved BECAUSE it has been met with 
justice. 
And UNTIL it has, it will recur because it has NOT yet been 
solved. 
The principle that justice MEANS no-one can lose is crucial 
to this course. 
For miracles DEPEND on justice. 
NOT as it is seen 
through this world's eyes, but as God knows it, and as knowledge is 
reflected in sight the Holy Spirit gives. 
NO-ONE deserves to lose. 

And what would be UNJUST to him can NOT occur. 
Healing must 
be for everyone BECAUSE he does not merit an attack of any kind. 

What order CAN there be in miracles, unless someone deserves to 
suffer MORE, and others LESS? And is this justice to the wholly in¬ 
nocent? 

T 25 J 6. 
A miracle IS justice. 
It is NOT a special gift to some, to be 
WITHHELD from others as LESS worthy, MORE condemned, and 
thus APART from healing. 
Who is there who can be separate from 
salvation, if its PURPOSE is the end of specialness? Where is salva¬ 
tion's justice if SOME errors are unforgivable, and WARRANT 
vengeance IN PLACE of healing and return of peace? Salvation can¬ 
not SEEK to help God's Son be MORE unfair than HE has sought to 
be. 
T(899) -718 If miracles, the Holy Spirit's gift, were given specially 
to an elect and special group, and kept APART from others as LESS 
deserving, then is He ALLY to specialness. 
What He cannot perceive 
He bears no witness to. 
And everyone is EQUALLY entitled to His 
gift of healing and deliverance and peace. 


T 25 J 7. 
To give a problem to the Holy Spirit to solve FOR you means 
that you WANT it solved. 
To keep it for yourself to solve WITH¬ 
OUT His help is to decide it should remain UNsettled, UNresolved, 
and lasting in its power of injustice and attack. 
No-one can BE un¬ 
just to you, unless you have decided first to BE unjust. 
And then 
MUST problems rise to block your way, and peace be scattered by 
the winds of hate. 
Unless you think that ALL your brothers have an 
equal right to miracles with you, you will not claim YOUR right to 
them, because you were unjust to one with EQUAL rights. 
Seek to 


1-816 


826 


Chapter 25 - The Remedy 


deny, and you WILL feel denied. 
Seek to deprive, and you HAVE 
BEEN deprived. 


T 25 J 8. 
A miracle can NEVER be received because another could re¬ 
ceive it NOT. 
Only forgiveness OFFERS miracles. 
And pardon 
MUST be just to everyone. 
The little problems that you keep and 
hide become your secret sins BECAUSE you did not choose to let 
them be removed FOR you. 
And so they gather dust and grow, until 
they cover EVERYTHING that you perceive, and leave you fair to 
no-one. 
Not ONE right do YOU believe you have. 
And bitterness, 
with vengeance justified and mercy lost, condemns you as UN¬ 
WORTHY of forgiveness. 
The unforgiven HAVE no mercy to be¬ 
stow upon another. 
That is why your sole responsibility MUST be to 
take forgiveness for yourself. 


T 25 J 9. 
The miracle that you receive you GIVE. 
Each one becomes an 
illustration of the law on which salvation rests; that justice MUST be 
done to all, if ANYONE is to be healed. 
No-one can lose, and every¬ 
one MUST benefit. 
Each miracle is an example of what justice can 
accomplish, when it is offered to everyone alike. 
It is received and 
GIVEN equally. 
It IS awareness that giving and receiving ARE the 
same. 
BECAUSE it does not make the same unlike, T(900) -719 it sees 
no differences where none exist. 
And thus it is the SAME for every¬ 
one, because it sees no differences in THEM. 
Its offering is universal, 
and it teaches but one message. 
What is God's BELONGS to every¬ 
one, and IS his due. 
T(901) -720 828 


828 November 27,1967 


827 


1-817 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 26 - The Transition 

T 26 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1803 11:178) 

T 26 A l. 
In the "dynamics" of attack is sacrifice a key idea. 
It is the 
pivot upon which ALL compromise, ALL desperate attempts to 
strike a bargain, and ALL conflicts achieve a seeming balance. 
It is 
the symbol of the central theme that SOMEBODY MUST LOSE. 
Its 
focus on the BODY is apparent, for it is ALWAYS an attempt to 
LIMIT LOSS. 
The body is ITSELF a sacrifice; a giving up of power, 
in the name of saving just a little for yourself. 
To see a brother in 
ANOTHER body, SEPARATE from yours, is the expression of a 
wish to see a little PART of him, and sacrifice the rest. 
Look at the 
world, and you will see nothing attached to ANYTHING beyond 
itself. 
All seeming entities can come a little nearer, or go a little far¬ 
ther off, but CANNOT join. 


T 26 B. 
The "Sacrifice" of Oneness (Notes 1803 11:178) 

T 26 B l. 
The world you see is based on SACRIFICE of oneness. 
It is a 
picture of a COMPLETE disunity and total LACK of joining. 

Around each entity is built a wall so seeming solid that it looks as if 
what is inside can never reach without, and what is out can never 
reach and join with what is locked away within the wall. 
Each part 
must SACRIFICE the other part to keep itself complete. 
For if they 
joined, each one would LOSE its own identity, and BY their separa¬ 
tion are their selves maintained. 
The little that the body fences off 
BECOMES the self, preserved through sacrifice of all the rest. 
And 
all the rest must LOSE this little part, remaining incomplete to keep 
its own identity intact. 


T 26 B 2. 
In THIS perception of your self the BODY'S loss would be a 
sacrifice indeed. 
And sight of bodies becomes the sign that sacrifice 
IS limited, and something still remains for you alone. 
And FOR this 
little to belong to you, are limits placed on EVERYTHING outside, 
just as they are on everything you think is YOURS. 
For giving and 
receiving ARE the same. 
And to ACCEPT the limits of a body is to 


1-818 


828 


Chapter 26 - The Transition 


IMPOSE these limits on each brother that you see. 
For you MUST 
see him as you see yourself. 
The body IS a loss, and CAN be made 
to sacrifice. 
And while you see your brother as a body, T(902) -721 
APART from you and separate in his cell, you are demanding sacri¬ 
fice of him AND you. 


T 26 B 3. 
What greater sacrifice could be demanded than that God's 
Son perceive himself without his Father? And his Father be without 
His Son? Yet EVERY sacrifice demands that they be separate and 
without the other. 
The memory of God MUST be denied, if ANY 
sacrifice is asked of ANYONE. 
What witness to the wholeness of 
God's Son is seen within a world of separate bodies, however much 
he witnesses to truth? He is INVISIBLE in such a world. 
Nor can his 
song of union and of joy be heard at all. 
Yet is it given him to make 
the world recede before his song and sight of him REPLACE the 
body's eyes. 


T 26 B 4. 
Those who would see the witnesses to truth INSTEAD of to 
illusion merely ask that they might see a PURPOSE in the world that 
gives it sense and makes it meaningful. 
WITHOUT your special 
function HAS this world no meaning for you. 
Yet it can become a 
treasure house as rich and limitless as Heaven Itself. 
No instant 
passes here in which your brother's holiness can NOT be seen, to 
add a limitless supply to every meager scrap and tiny crumb of 
happiness that you allot yourself. 
You CAN lose sight of oneness, 
but can NOT make sacrifice of its reality. 
Nor can you LOSE what 
you would sacrifice, nor keep the Holy Spirit from His task of show¬ 
ing you that it has NOT been lost. 


T 26 B 5. 
Hear, then, the song your brother sings to you. 
And LET the 
world recede , 829 and TAKE the rest his witness offers on behalf of 
peace. 
But judge him not, for you will hear no song of liberation for 
yourself, nor see what it is given him to witness to, that YOU may 
see it and rejoice WITH him. 
Make not his holiness a sacrifice to 


829 Urtext manuscript has it typed “you see” it is corrected by handwritten mark-up to “recede” which 
agrees with the Notes. 



829 


1-819 



Volume I Text 


your belief in sin. 
You sacrifice YOUR innocence with his, and die 
each time you see in him a sin deserving death. 
Yet every instant 
can you be reborn, and given life again. 
His holiness gives life to 
you, who CANNOT die because his sinlessness is known to God, 
and T(903) -722 can no more be sacrificed by you than can the light in 
you be blotted out because he sees it not. 


T 26 B 6. 
You who would make a sacrifice of life, and make your eyes 
and ears bear witness to the death of God and of His holy Son, think 
not that you have power to make of them what God willed not they 
be. 
In Heaven God's Son is NOT imprisoned in a body, nor is sacri¬ 
ficed in solitude to sin. 
And as he is in Heaven, so MUST he be eter¬ 
nally and everywhere. 
He is the same forever . 
830 Born again each 
instant, untouched by time, and FAR beyond the reach of ANY sac¬ 
rifice of life OR death . 
831 For neither did he make, and only ONE 
was given him, by One Who KNOWS His gifts can NEVER suffer 
sacrifice and loss. 


T 26 B 7. 
God's justice rests in gentleness upon His Son, and keeps 
him safe from ALL injustices the world would lay upon him. 

COULD it be that YOU could make his sins reality, and sacrifice his 
Father's Will for him? Condemn him not by seeing him within the 
rotting prison where he sees himself. 
It is your special function to 
ensure the door be opened, that he may come forth to shine on you, 
and give you back the gift of freedom by receiving it of you. 
What is 
the Holy Spirit's Special Function but to release the holy Son of God 
from the imprisonment he made, to KEEP himself from justice? 
Could YOUR function be a task apart and SEPARATE from His 
Own? T(904) -723 832 

T 26 C. 
The Forms of Error (Notes 1810 11:185) 

T 26 C 1 . 
It is NOT difficult to understand the reasons why you do not 
ask the Holy Spirit to solve ALL problems for you. 
HE has not a 


s3 ° Hebrews 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever. 


S1 John 3:3 Jesus answered and said to him, “Most assuredly, I say to you, unless one is bom again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God.” 

832 November 28, 1967 


1-820 


830 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


greater difficulty in resolving some than others. 
Every problem is 
the SAME to Him, because each one is solved in just the SAME re¬ 
spect, and through the SAME approach. 
The aspects that NEED 
solving do not change, whatever FORM the problem seems to take. 

A problem can appear in MANY forms, and it will do so while the 
problem lasts. 
It serves no purpose to attempt to solve it in a SPE¬ 
CIAL form. 
It WILL recur, and then recur again and yet again, until 
it has been answered for ALL time, and will not rise again in ANY 
form. 
And ONLY then are you RELEASED from it. 


T 26 c 2. 
The Holy Spirit offers you release from EVERY problem that 
you think you have. 
They are the SAME to Him, because each one, 
regardless of the form it seems to take, is a demand that someone 
suffer loss, and make a sacrifice that you might gain. 
And, when the 
situation is worked out so NO-ONE loses, is the problem gone, be¬ 
cause it was an error in perception, which now has been corrected. 

One mistake is NOT more difficult for Him to bring to truth than is 
another. 
For there IS but one mistake; the whole idea that loss is 
possible, and COULD result in gain for anyone. 
If THIS were true, 
then God WOULD be unfair; sin WOULD be possible, attack be jus¬ 
tified, and vengeance fair. 
This ONE mistake, in ANY form, has 
ONE correction. 
There IS no loss; to think there IS, is a mistake. 


T 26 c 3. 
You HAVE no problems, though you THINK you have. 
And 
yet you COULD not think so, if you saw them vanish one by one, 
WITHOUT regard to size, complexity, or place and time, or ANY 
attribute which you perceive that makes each one seem different 
from the rest. 
Think not the limits YOU impose on what you see can 
limit God in ANY way. 
The miracle of justice can correct ALL er¬ 
rors. 
Every problem IS an error. 
It does injustice to the Son of God, 
T(905) -724 and therefore is not true. 
The Holy Spirit does not evaluate 
injustices as great or small, or more or less. 
They have NO proper¬ 
ties to Him. 
They are mistakes from which the Son of God IS suffer¬ 
ing, but needlessly. 
And so He takes the thorns and nails away. 
He 
does not pause to judge whether the hurt be large or little. 
He makes 


831 


1-821 


Volume I Text 


but one judgment; that to hurt God's Son MUST be unfair, and 
therefore is not so. 


T 26 C 4. 
You who believe it safe to give but SOME mistakes to be 
corrected while you keep the others to yourself, remember this: Jus¬ 
tice is total. 
There IS no such thing as partial justice. 
If the Son of 
God is guilty, then is he condemned, and he DESERVES no mercy 
from the God of justice. 
But ask not God to punish him because 
YOU find him guilty, and would have him die. 
God OFFERS you 
the means to see his innocence. 
Would it be fair to punish him be¬ 
cause you will not LOOK at what is there to see? Each time you 
keep a problem for YOURSELF to solve, or judge that it is one which 
HAS no resolution, you have made it great, and past the hope of 
healing. 
You deny the miracle of justice CAN be fair. 


T 26 c 5. 
If God is just, then CAN there be NO problems that justice 
cannot solve. 
But YOU believe that some injustices ARE fair and 
good, and necessary to preserve yourself. 
It is THESE problems that 
you think are great, and cannot BE resolved. 
For there are those you 
WANT to suffer loss, and NO-ONE whom you wish to be preserved 
from sacrifice entirely. 
Consider once again your special function. 

ONE is given you to see in him his perfect sinlessness. 
And you will 
ASK no sacrifice of him, because you could not will he suffer loss. 

The miracle of justice you call forth will rest on you as surely as on 
him. 
Nor will the Holy Spirit be content until it is received by eve¬ 
ryone. 
For what you give to Him IS everyone's, and BY your giving 
it can He ensure that everyone receives it equally. 
T(906) -725 
T 26 c 6. 
Think, then, how great your OWN release will be, when you 
are willing to receive correction for ALL your problems. 
You will 
not keep ONE, for pain in ANY form you will not WANT. 
And you 
will see each little hurt resolved before the Holy Spirit's gentle sight. 

For all of them ARE little in His sight and worth no more than just a 
tiny sigh before they disappear, to be forever undone and unre¬ 
membered. 
What seemed once to be a SPECIAL problem, a mistake 
WITHOUT a remedy, or an affliction WITHOUT a cure, has been 
transformed into a universal blessing. 
Sacrifice is gone. 
And in its 


1-822 


832 


Chapter 26 - The Transition 


place, the Love of God can be remembered, and will shine away all 
memory of sacrifice and loss. 


T 26 c 7. 
He cannot BE remembered until justice is loved INSTEAD of 
feared. 
He cannot be unjust to anyone or anything, because He 
knows that EVERYTHING that is belongs to Him, and will forever 
be as He created it. 
Nothing He loves but MUST be sinless and be¬ 
yond attack. 
Your special function opens wide the door beyond 
which is the memory of His Love kept perfectly intact and unde¬ 
filed. 
And all you need to do is but to wish that Heaven be given 
you instead of hell, and every bolt and barrier that seems to hold the 
door securely barred and locked, will merely fall away, and disap¬ 
pear. 
For it is NOT your Father's Will that you should offer or re¬ 
ceive LESS than He gave, when He created you in perfect Love. 


T(907) -726 833 

T 26 D, The Borderland (Notes 1816 11:191) 

T 26 D l. 
Complexity is not of God. 
How COULD it be, when all He 
knows is One? He knows of ONE creation, ONE reality, ONE truth, 
and but ONE Son. 
Nothing CONFLICTS with Oneness. 
How, then, 
COULD there be complexity in Him? What IS there to decide? For it 
is CONFLICT that makes choice complex. 
The truth is simple; it is 
one, WITHOUT an opposite. 
And how could strife enter in its sim¬ 
ple Presence, and bring complexity where Oneness is? The truth 
makes NO decisions, for there is nothing to decide BETWEEN. 
And 
ONLY if there were could choosing be a necessary step in the ad¬ 
vance toward Oneness. 
What is everything leaves room for NOTH¬ 
ING ELSE. 


T 26 D 2. 
Yet is this magnitude beyond the scope of this curriculum. 

Nor is it necessary we dwell on anything that cannot be immedi¬ 
ately grasped. 
There is a borderland of thought that stands between 
this world and Heaven. 
It is not a place, and WHEN you reach it is 
APART from time. 
Here is the meeting place where thoughts are 
brought TOGETHER; where conflicting values MEET, and ALL illu- 


833 December 1, 1967 


833 


1-823 



Volume I Text 


sions are laid down beside the truth, where they are judged to be 
untrue. 
This borderland is just beyond the gate of Heaven. 
834 Here is 
every thought made pure and wholly simple. 
Here is sin denied, 
and everything that IS received instead. 


T 26 D 3. 
This is the journey's end. 
We have referred to it as the "real 
world." And yet there is a contradiction here, in that the words im¬ 
ply a LIMITED reality, a PARTIAL truth, a SEGMENT of the uni¬ 
verse made true. 
This is because knowledge makes NO attack upon 
perception. 
They are brought together, and only ONE continues 
past the gate where Oneness is. 
Salvation IS a borderland, where 
place and time and choice have meaning still, and yet it can be seen 
that they are temporary, OUT of place, and EVERY choice has been 
ALREADY made. 
T(908) -727 

T 26 D 4. 
Nothing the Son of God believes can be destroyed. 
But what 
is truth to him must be brought to the last comparison that he will 
ever make; the last evaluation that will be possible, the final judg¬ 
ment upon this world. 
835 It is the judgment of the truth upon illu¬ 
sion, of knowledge on perception; IT HAS NO MEANING AND 
DOES NOT EXIST. 
This is NOT your decision. 
It is but a simple 
statement of a simple fact. 
But in this world there ARE no simple 
facts, because what is the same and what is different remain unclear. 

The one ESSENTIAL thing to make a choice at all is this distinction. 

And herein lies the difference between the worlds. 
In this one, 
choice IS made impossible. 
In the real world, is choosing simplified. 


T 26 D 5. 
Salvation stops just short of Heaven, for only perception 
NEEDS salvation. 
Heaven was never lost, and so can not be saved. 

Yet who can make a choice BETWEEN the wish for Heaven and the 
wish for hell, unless he recognizes they are NOT the same? This dif- 


834 Genesis 28:17 And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none other than the 
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!” 

835 Matthew 11:22 “But I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of 
judgment than for you.” 

Another of the differences between a common understanding of the Bible and ACIM’s teaching is 
pointed out here. 
The “last Judgement” in ACIM is not the point at which the sinners are punished, but 
rather the point at which God judges all Creation “innocent” and the illusion of guilt dissolves in 
forgiveness as the truth is recognized with joy. 



1-824 


834 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


ference is the learning goal this course has set. 
It will not go beyond 
this aim. 
Its ONLY purpose is to teach what is the same and what is 
different, leaving room to make the only choice that CAN be made. 

There is no basis FOR choice in this complex and over-complicated 
world. 
For no-one understands what is the same, and seems to 
choose where no choice really is. 
The real world is the area of choice 
made real, NOT in the outcome, but in the perception of alternatives 
FOR choice. 


T 26 D 6. 
That there IS choice is an illusion. 
Yet, within this ONE lies 
the undoing of every illusion, NOT excepting this. 
Is not this like 
your special function, where the separation is undone by change of 
PURPOSE in what once was specialness, and now IS union? ALL 
illusions are but one. 
And, in the recognition this is so, lies the abil¬ 
ity to give up ALL attempts to choose BETWEEN them, and make 
them different. 
How simple is the choice between two things so 
clearly UNalike. 
There IS no conflict here. 
No sacrifice T(909) -728 is 
possible in the relinquishment of an illusion RECOGNIZED as such. 

Where ALL reality has been withdrawn from what was NEVER 
true, can it BE hard to give it up, and choose what MUST be true? 
T(910) -729 836 

T 26 E. 
Where Sin Has Left (Notes 182111:196) 

T 26 E l. 
Forgiveness is this world's equivalent of Heaven's justice. 
It 
translates the world of sin into a simple world, where justice can be 
reflected from BEYOND the gate behind which total lack of limits 
lies. 
Nothing in boundless love could NEED forgiveness. 
And what 
is charity WITHIN the world gives way to simple justice past the 
gate that opens into Heaven. 
No-one forgives unless he has believed 
in sin, and STILL believes that he has much to be forgiven. 
Forgive¬ 
ness thus becomes the means by which he learns HE has done noth¬ 
ing to forgive. 
Forgiveness always rests upon the one who offers it, 
until he sees HIMSELF as needing it no more. 
And thus is he re- 


836 December 4, 1967 


835 


1-825 



Volume I Text 


turned to his REAL function of creating, which his forgiveness offers 
him again. 


T 26 E 2. 
Forgiveness turns the world of sin into a world of glory, 
wonderful to see. 
Each flower shines in light, and every bird sings of 
the joy of Heaven. 
There is no sadness and there is no parting here, 
for everything is TOTALLY forgiven. 
And what has been forgiven 
MUST join, for nothing stands BETWEEN, to keep them separate 
and apart. 
The sinless MUST perceive that 837 they are one, for noth¬ 
ing stands between, to push the other off, and in the space which sin 
left vacant do they JOIN as one, in gladness recognizing what is part 
of them has NOT been kept apart and separate. 
The holy place on 
which you stand is but the space that sin has left. 
838 And here you 
see the Face of Christ arising in its place. 


T 26 E 3. 
Who could behold the Face of Christ, and NOT recall His 
Father as He really is? Who could fear love, and stand upon the 
ground where sin has left a place for Heaven's altar to rise and 
tower far above the world, and reach beyond the universe to touch 
the heart of ALL creation? What IS Heaven, but a song of gratitude 
and love and praise, by everything created, to the Source of its crea¬ 
tion? The holiest of altars is set where once was sin believed to be. 

For here does every light of heaven come, to be rekindled and in¬ 
creased in joy. 
For here is what was lost to them restored, and all 
their radiance made whole again. 
T(911) -730 

T 26 E 4. 
Forgiveness brings no little miracles to lay before the gate of 
Heaven. 
Here the Son of God Himself comes to receive each gift that 
brings him nearer to his home. 
Not one is lost, and none is cherished 
more than any other. 
Each reminds him of His Father's Love as 
surely as the rest. 
And each one teaches him that what he fears he 
loves the most. 
What BUT a miracle could change his mind, so that 
he understands that love cannot BE feared? What other miracle is 


8j7 The word “that" doesn’t appear in the Notes and was typed between the lines later, in much fainter 
typing. 


838 Exodus 3:5 Then He said, “Do not draw near this place. 
Take your sandals off your feet, for the 
place where you stand is holy ground.” 


1-826 


836 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


there but this? And what else NEED there be, to make the space be¬ 
tween you disappear? Where sin once was perceived will rise a 
world which will become an altar to the truth. 
And YOU will join 
the lights of Heaven there, and sing their song of gratitude and 
praise. 


T 26 E 5. 
For as they come to YOU to be complete, so will you go with 
them. 
For no-one hears the song of Heaven, and remains without a 
voice that adds its power to the song, and makes it sweeter still. 


And each one joins the singing at the altar which was raised within 
the tiny spot that sin proclaimed to be its own. 
And what WAS tiny 
then has soared into a magnitude of song, in which the universe has 
joined with but a single voice. 
This tiny spot of sin that stands be¬ 
tween you still is holding back the happy opening of Heaven's gate. 

How LITTLE is the hindrance which withholds the wealth of 
Heaven from you. 
And how GREAT will be the joy in Heaven when 
you join the mighty chorus to the Love of God. 
839 T(912) -73l 840 

T 26 F. 
The Little Hindrance (Notes 1825 11:200) 

T 26 F l. 
A little hindrance can seem large indeed to those who do not 
understand that miracles are all the same. 
But teaching that is what 
this course is FOR. 
That is its only purpose, for only that is all there 
is to learn. 
And you can learn it many different ways. 
All learning is 
a help or hindrance to the gate of Heaven. 
Nothing in between is 
possible. 
There are TWO teachers only, who point in different ways. 

And you will go along the way your chosen teacher leads. 
There are 
but TWO directions you can take, while time remains and choice is 
meaningful. 
For never will another road be made, except the way to 
Heaven. 
You but choose whether to go TOWARD Heaven, or away 
to nowhere. 
There is nothing else to choose. 


T 26 F 2. 
Nothing is ever lost but time, which, in the end, IS nothing. 


It is but a little hindrance to eternity, quite meaningless to the real 


839 Luke 15:7 “I say to you that likewise there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents 
than over ninety-nine just persons who need no repentance.” 

840 December 10, 1967 


837 


1-827 



Volume I Text 


Teacher of the world. 
But since you DO believe in its reality, why 
should you waste it going nowhere, when it CAN be used to reach a 
goal as high as learning can achieve? Think not the way to Heaven's 
gate is difficult at all. 
Nothing you undertake with certain purpose 
and high resolve and happy confidence, holding each other's hand 
and keeping step to Heaven's song, is difficult to do. 
But it IS hard 
indeed to wander off, alone and miserable, down a road which leads 
to nothing, and which HAS no purpose. 


T 26 F 3. 
God gave His Teacher to REPLACE the one you made, NOT 
to CONFLICT with it. 
And what He would replace HAS BEEN re¬ 
placed. 
Time lasted but an instant in your mind, with NO effect 
upon eternity. 
And so is ALL time past, 841 and everything EXACTLY 
as it was before the way to nothingness was made. 
The tiny tick of 
time, in which T(913) -732 the first mistake was made, and ALL of 
them within that ONE mistake, held also the Correction for that one, 
and ALL of them that came within the first. 
And in that tiny instant 
time was gone, for that was all it ever was. 
What God gave Answer 
to IS answered, and IS gone. 


T 26 F 4. 
To you who still believe you live in time, and know not it is 
gone, the Holy Spirit still guides you through the infinitely small 
and senseless maze you still perceive in time, though it has long 
since gone. 
You think you live in what is past. 
Each thing you look 
upon you saw but for an instant, long ago, before its unreality gave 
way to truth. 
Not one illusion still remains unanswered in your 
mind. 
Uncertainty was brought to Certainty so long ago that it is 
hard indeed to hold it to your heart, as if it were before you still. 
The 
tiny instant you would keep, and make eternal, passed away in 
Heaven too soon for anything to notice it had come. 


T 26 F 5. 
What disappeared too quickly to affect the simple knowl¬ 
edge of the Son of God, can hardly still be there for you to choose to 
be your teacher. 
Only in the past, - an ancient past, too short to 


841 The Urtext manuscript has “passed” wile the Notes and HLC have “past” which appears more 
correct. 



1-828 


838 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


make a world in answer to creation, - did this world APPEAR to 
rise. 
So VERY long ago, for such a tiny interval of time that not one 
note in Heaven's song was missed. 
Yet, in each unforgiving act or 
thought, in every judgment, and in all belief in sin is that one instant 
still called back, as if it could be made again in time. 
You keep an 
ancient memory before your eyes. 
And he who lives in memories 
alone is unaware of where he IS. 
T(914) -740 842 
T 26 F 6. 
Forgiveness is the great release from time. 
It is the key to 
learning that the past is over. 
Madness speaks no more. 
There IS no 
OTHER teacher and no OTHER way. 
For what has been undone no 
longer is. 
And who can stand upon a distant shore, and dream him¬ 
self across an ocean, to a place and time that have long since gone 
by? How REAL a hindrance can this dream be to where he really IS? 
For this is fact, and does NOT change whatever dreams he has. 
Yet 
can he still IMAGINE he is elsewhere, and in another time. 
In the 
extreme, he can delude himself that this is true, and pass from mere 
imagining into belief and into madness, quite convinced that where 
he would prefer to be, he IS. 


T 26 F 7. 
Is this a HINDRANCE to the place whereon he stands? Is 
any echo from the past that he may hear a fact in what is there to 
hear where he is now? And how much can his own delusions about 
time and place affect a change in where he REALLY is? The unfor¬ 
given is a voice that calls from out a past forever more gone by. 
And 
everything which points to it as real is but a wish that what is gone 
could be made real again, and seen as here and now, in place of 
what is REALLY now and here. 
Is this a HINDRANCE to the truth 
the past has gone, and CANNOT be returned to you? And do you 


s4 “ The Urtext manuscript pagination jumps from 732 to 740. 
This MAY or MAY NOT indicate missing 
material. 
It could be simply a pagination error by the typist misreading the “previous page” which is 
732, as 739 and then adding one for the “on-the-fly manual pagination and thus typing 740. 
I know this 
is possible because when working with this issue, I actually mistook page 732 for page 739 and thought 
I’d found a missing page for a moment. 
The “2” on the typewriter in use is unusual, and somewhat 
“top-heavy” making it easier to mistake a 2 for a 9 than would normally be the case. 
We can add that 
the Notes shows no indication of missing material, nor does the HLC. 
Were there ever pages 733-39, 
they are apparently not transcripts of the Notes. 



839 


1-829 



Volume I Text 


WANT that fearful instant kept, when Heaven seemed to disappear, 
and God was feared and made a symbol of your hate? 

T 26 F 8. 
Forget the time of terror that has been so long ago corrected 
and undone. 
Can sin withstand the Will of God? Can it be up to you 
to see the past, and put it in the present? You can NOT go back. 
And 
everything that points the way in the direction of the past but sets 
you on a mission whose accomplishment can ONLY be unreal. 
T(915) 
-741 Such is the justice your ever loving Father has ensured MUST 
come to you. 
And from your own unfairness unto yourself has He 
protected you. 
You CANNOT lose your way, because there is no 
Way but His, and nowhere CAN you go, except to Him. 
Would He 
allow His Son to lose his way along a road long since a distant 
memory of a time gone by? 

T 26 F 9. 
This course will teach you ONLY what is now. 
A dreadful 
instant in a distant past, now perfectly corrected, is of no concern or 
value. 
Let the dead and gone be peacefully forgotten. 
843 Resurrection 
has come to take its place. 
And now you are a part of Resurrection, 
NOT of death. 
No past illusions have the power to keep you in a 
place of death, a vault God's Son entered an instant, to be instantly 
restored unto His Father's Perfect Love. 
And how can he be kept in 
chains long since removed, and gone forever from his mind? The 
Son that God created is as free as God created him. 
He was reborn 
the instant that he chose to die, instead of live. 
And will you not for¬ 
give him now, because he made an error in the past that God re¬ 
members not, and is not there? 

T 26 F to. 
Now are you shifting back and forth, between the past and 
present. 
Sometimes the past seems real, as if it WERE the present. 

Voices FROM the past are heard, and then are doubted. 
You are like 
to one who still hallucinates, but lacks conviction in what he per¬ 
ceives. 
This is the borderland between the worlds, the bridge be¬ 
tween the past and present. 
Here the shadow of the past remains, 
but still a present Light is dimly recognized. 
Once it is seen, this 


843 Matthew 8:22 But Jesus said to him, “Follow Me, and let the dead bury their own dead.” 


1-830 


840 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


Light can never be forgotten. 
It MUST draw you from the past into 
the present, where you really ARE. 
The shadow voices do not 
CHANGE the laws of time or of eternity. 
They come from what is 
past and gone, but hinder not the true existence of the here and 
now. 
T(916) -742 

T 26 F 11. 
The real world is the second part of the hallucination time 
and death are real, and have existence which can be perceived. 
This 
terrible illusion was denied in but the time it took for God to give 
His Answer to illusion for ALL time and EVERY circumstance. 
And 
then it was no more, to be experienced as there. 
Each day, and every 
minute in each day, and every instant that each minute holds, you 
but relive the single instant when the time of terror was replaced by 
Love. 
And so you die each day to live again, until you cross the gap 
between the past and present, which is NOT a gap at all. 


T 26 F12. 
Such is each life; a seeming interval from birth to death, and 
on to life again, a repetition of an instant gone by long ago, which 
CANNOT be relived. 
And ALL of time is but the mad belief that 
what is over is still here and now. 
Forgive the past and let it go, for 
it IS gone. 
You stand no longer on the ground that lies between the 
worlds. 
You HAVE gone on, and reached the world that lies at 
Heaven's gate. 
There IS no hindrance to the Will of God, nor any 
need that you repeat again a journey that was over long ago. 
Look 
gently on each other, and behold the world in which perception of 
your hate has been transformed into a world of Love. 
T(917) -743 844 

T 26 G. 
The Appointed Friend (Notes 1834 11:209) 

T 26 G1. 
Anything in this world that you believe is good and valu¬ 
able and worth striving for can hurt you, and will do so. 
NOT be¬ 
cause it has the power to hurt, but just because YOU have denied it 
is but an illusion, AND MADE IT REAL. 
And it IS real to you. 
It is 
NOT nothing. 
And through its perceived reality has entered all the 
world of sick illusions. 
All belief in sin, in power of attack, in hurt 
and harm, in sacrifice and death, has come to you. 
For no-one can 


844 December 14, 1967 


841 


1-831 



Volume I Text 


make one illusion real, and still escape the rest. 
For who can choose 
to keep the ones which he prefers, and find the safety that the truth 
alone can give? Who can believe illusions are the same, and still 
maintain that even one is best? 

T 26 G 2. 
Lead not your little lives in solitude, with one illusion as 
your only friend. 
This is no friendship worthy of God's Son, nor one 
with which he could remain content. 
But God has given him a better 
Friend, in whom all power in earth and Heaven rests. 
845 The one il¬ 
lusion that you THINK is friend obscures HIS grace and majesty 
from you, and keeps his friendship and forgiveness from your wel¬ 
coming embrace. 
Without him you are friendless. 
Seek not another 
friend to take his place. 
There IS no other friend. 
What God ap¬ 
pointed HAS no substitute. 
And what illusion CAN replace the 
truth? 

T 26 G 3. 
Who dwells with shadows is alone indeed, and loneliness is 
NOT the Will of God. 
Would you allow one shadow to usurp the 
throne that God appointed for your Friend, if you but realized ITS 
emptiness has left YOURS empty and unoccupied? Make NO illu¬ 
sion friend, for if you do, it CAN but take the place of him whom 
God has called your Friend. 
And it is he who is your ONLY Friend 
in truth. 
He brings you gifts that are not of this world, and only he, 
to whom they have been given, CAN make sure that you receive 
them. 
846 He will place them on YOUR throne, when you make room 
for him on his. 
T(918) -744 847 

T 26 H. 
Review of Principles (Notes 1837 11:212) 

T 26 H l. 
This is a course in miracles. 
And, as such, the laws of heal¬ 
ing must be understood before the purpose of the course can be ac¬ 
complished. 
Let us review the principles that we have covered, and 
arrange them in a way that summarizes all that must occur for heal- 


845 Matthew 28:18 And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, “All authority has been given to Me in 
heaven and on earth.” 

846 John 14:27 “Peace I leave with you, My peace I give to you; not as the world gives do I give to you. 

Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.” 

847 December 21, 1967 


1-832 


842 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


ing to be possible. 
For when it once is possible, it MUST occur. 
ALL 
sickness comes from separation. 
When the separation is denied, it 
goes. 
For it IS gone as soon as the idea which brought it has been 
healed and been replaced by sanity. 
Sickness and sin are seen as 
consequence and cause, in a relationship kept hidden from aware¬ 
ness, that it may be carefully preserved from reason's light. 


T 26 H 2. 
Guilt ASKS FOR punishment, and its request is granted. 

NOT in truth, but in the world of shadows and illusions BUILT on 
sin. 
The Son of God perceives what he would see, because percep¬ 
tion IS a wish fulfilled. 
Perception changes, MADE to take the place 
of changeless knowledge. 
Yet is truth unchanged. 
It cannot BE per¬ 
ceived, but only known. 
What is perceived takes many forms, but 
NONE has meaning. 
Brought to truth, its senselessness is quite ap¬ 
parent. 
Kept APART from truth, it SEEMS to have a meaning and be 
real. 
Perception's laws are OPPOSITE to truth, and what IS true of 
knowledge is NOT true of ANYTL1ING that is apart from it. 
Yet has 
God given Answer to the world of sickness. 
Which applies to ALL 
its forms. 


T 26 H 3. 
God's Answer is eternal, though It operates in time, where It 
is needed. 
But, because It IS of God, the laws of time do not affect Its 
workings. 
It is in this world, but NOT a part of it. 
848 For It is real, 
and dwells where all reality MUST be. 
Ideas leave not their source, 
and their effects but SEEM to be apart from them. 
Ideas are of the 
mind. 
What is projected OUT, and seems to be EXTERNAL to the 
mind, is NOT outside at all, but an effect of what is in, and has NOT 
left its source. 
God's Answer lies where the belief in sin MUST be, 
for only there can its effects be utterly undone, and without cause. 

T(919)-745 


848 John 15:19 “If you were of the world, the world would love its own. 
Yet because you are not of the 
world, but I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.” 

John 17:14 “I have given them Your word; and the world has hated them because they are not of the 
world, just as I am not of the world.” 

John 17:16 “They are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.” 

John 17:18 “As You sent Me into the world, I also have sent them into the world.” 


843 


1-833 



Volume I Text 


T 26 H 4. 
Perception's laws must be reversed, because they ARE re¬ 
versals of the laws of truth. 
The laws of truth FOREVER will be true, 
and cannot BE reversed; 849 yet can be SEEN as upside down. 
And 
this must be corrected where the illusion of reversal lies. 
It is impos¬ 
sible that one illusion be LESS amenable to truth than are the rest. 

But it IS possible that some are given greater VALUE, and less will¬ 
ingly OFFERED to truth for healing and for help. 
NO illusion has 
ANY truth in it. 
Yet it appears some are MORE true than others, al¬ 
though this clearly makes no sense at all. 
All that a hierarchy of illu¬ 
sions can show is PREFERENCE, NOT reality. 


T 26 H 5. 
What relevance has preference to the truth? Illusions are il¬ 
lusions, and are false. 
Your preference gives them NO reality. 
Not 
one is true in ANY way, and all must yield with equal ease to what 
God gave as Answer to them all. 
God's Will is One. 
And ANY wish 
that SEEMS to go AGAINST His Will has NO foundation in the 
truth. 
Sin is not error, for it goes BEYOND correction to impossibil¬ 
ity. 
Yet the belief that it is real has made some errors seem forever 
PAST the hope of healing, and the lasting grounds for hell. 
If this 
were so, would Heaven be opposed by its own opposite, as real as 
it. 


T 26 H 6. 
Then would God's Will be split in two, and all creation be 
subjected to the laws of two opposing powers, until God becomes 
impatient, splits the world apart, and relegates attack unto Himself. 

Thus has He lost His Mind, proclaiming sin has taken His reality 
from Him, and brought His Love at last to vengeance' heels. 
For 
such an insane picture, an insane defense can be expected, but can 
NOT establish that the picture must be true. 
Nothing GIVES mean¬ 
ing where no meaning IS. 
And truth needs NO defense to make it 
true. 
Illusions HAVE no witnesses, and no effects. 
Who looks on 
them is but deceived. 



: 11 The Urtext manuscript has a full stop here. 
In the Notes however, the full stop glyph is crossed out 
and a semi-colon inserted. 
Rather obviously, a full stop is not appropriate, indeed no punctuation is 
absolutely necessary, but a semi-colon is preferable to a full stop. 
We are therefore counting this a typo 
and restoring the Notes reading. 



1-834 


844 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


T 26 H 7. 
Forgiveness is the only function here, and serves to bring the 
joy this world denies to every aspect of God's Son where sin was 
thought to rule. 
Perhaps you do not see the role forgiveness plays in 
ending death, and ALL beliefs T(920) -746 that rise from mists of guilt. 

Sins are beliefs which you impose between your brother and your¬ 
self. 
They limit you to time and place, and give a little space to you; 
ANOTHER little space to him. 
This separating off is symbolized, in 
your perception, by a body which is clearly separate and a thing 
apart. 
Yet what this symbol REPRESENTS is but your wish to BE 
apart and separate. 


T 26 H 8. 
Forgiveness TAKES AWAY what stands between your 
brother and yourself. 
It is the wish that you be JOINED with him, 
and NOT alone. 
We call it "wish" because it still conceives of other 
choices, and has not yet reached beyond the world of choice en¬ 
tirely. 
Yet is this wish in line with Heaven's state, 850 and not in OP¬ 
POSITION to God's Will. 
Although it falls far short of giving you 
your full inheritance, it DOES remove the obstacles which YOU 
have placed between the Heaven where you are, and RECOGNI¬ 
TION of where and what you are. 
Facts are unchanged. 
But facts 
can be denied and thus unknown, though they were known BE¬ 
FORE they were denied. 


T 26 H 9. 
Salvation, perfect and complete, asks but a LITTLE wish that 
what is true be true. 
A LITTLE willingness to overlook what is not 
there. 
A LITTLE sigh that speaks for Heaven as a preference to this 
world which death and desolation seem to rule. 
In joyous answer 
will creation rise within you, to REPLACE the world you see with 
Heaven, wholly perfect and complete. 
What is forgiveness, but a 
willingness that truth be true? What can remain unhealed and bro¬ 
ken from a Unity Which holds all things within Itself? There is NO 
sin. 
And EVERY miracle is possible the INSTANT that the Son of 
God perceives his wishes and the Will of God are One. 
T(92l) -74 7 851 


850 Urtext manuscript has it typed “Heaven’s gate” handwritten mark-up corrects this to the Notes 
reading which is “Heaven’s state.” 

851 December 25, 1967 


845 


1-835 



Volume I Text 


T 26 H 10. 
What is the Will of God? He wills His Son have everything. 

And this He guaranteed when He created him AS everything. 
It is 
impossible that anything be lost, if what you HAVE is what you 
ARE. 
This is the miracle by which creation became YOUR function, 
sharing it with God. 
It is not understood APART from Him, and 
therefore has no meaning in this world. 
Here does the Son of God 
ask NOT too much, but FAR too little. 
He would sacrifice his own 
identity WITH everything, to find a LITTLE treasure of his own. 


And this he cannot do, without a sense of isolation, loss, and loneli¬ 
ness. 
This IS the treasure he has sought to find. 
And he COULD 
only be afraid of it. 


T 26 H 11 . 
Is fear a treasure? Can uncertainty be what you WANT? Or 
is it a mistake about your will, and what you REALLY are? Let us 
consider what the error IS, so it can be corrected, NOT protected. 
Sin 
is belief attack can be projected OUTSIDE the mind where the belief 
arose. 
Here is the firm conviction that ideas CAN leave their source 
made real and meaningful. 
And FROM this error does the world of 
sin and sacrifice arise. 
This world is an attempt to prove your inno¬ 
cence, while cherishing attack. 
Its failure lies in that you STILL FEEL 
guilty, though without understanding WHY. 
Effects are SEPA¬ 
RATED from their source. 
They SEEM to be BEYOND you to con¬ 
trol or to prevent. 


T 26 H 12. 
What has been KEPT apart can never join. 
Cause and effect 
are one, NOT separate. 
God wills you learn what always has been 
true. 
That he created you as part of Him, and this must still be true 
BECAUSE ideas leave not their source. 
Such is creation's law; that 
each idea T(922) -748 the mind conceives but ADDS to its abundance, 
NEVER takes away. 
This is as true of what is idly wished as what is 
truly willed, because the mind can wish to be deceived, but CAN¬ 
NOT make it be what it is not. 
And to believe ideas can leave their 
source is to invite illusions to be true, WITHOUT SUCCESS. 
Nor 
never will success BE possible in trying to deceive the Son of God. 


T 26 H 13. 
The miracle is possible when cause and consequence are 
brought together, NOT kept separate. 
The healing of effect WITH- 


1-836 


846 


Chapter 26 - The Transition 


OUT the cause can merely shift effects to other forms. 
And this is 
NOT release. 
God's Son could never be content with LESS than full 
salvation, and ESCAPE from guilt. 
For otherwise he still demands 
that he must make SOME sacrifice, and thus denies that EVERY¬ 
THING is his, unlimited by loss of any kind. 
A tiny sacrifice is just 
the same in its EFFECTS as is the WHOLE idea of sacrifice. 
If loss in 
ANY form is possible, then is God's Son made incomplete and not 
himself. 
Nor will he know himself, nor recognize his will. 
He has 
foresworn his Father AND himself, and made them both his enemy 
in hate. 


T 26 H14. 
Illusions serve the purpose they were MADE to serve. 
And 
FROM their purpose, they derive whatever meaning that they seem 
to have. 
God gave to ALL illusions that were made ANOTHER pur¬ 
pose that would justify a miracle, WHATEVER form they took. 
In 
every miracle ALL healing lies, for God gave Answer to them all as 
one. 
And what is one to Him must BE the same. 
If you believe what 
is the same is different, you but deceive yourself. 
What God calls 
one will be forever one, NOT separate. 
852 His Kingdom IS united; 
thus it was created, and thus will it ever be. 
The miracle but calls 
your ancient name, which you WILL recognize because the truth is 
in your memory. 
And to this name your brother calls T(923) -749 for 
his release and yours. 
Heaven is shining on the Son of God. 
Deny 
him not, that YOU may be released. 


T 26 H15. 
Each instant is the Son of God reborn, until he chooses 
NOT to die again. 
In every wish to hurt he chooses death, instead of 
what his Father wills for him. 
Yet every instant offers life to him, 
because his Father wills that he should live. 
In crucifixion is re¬ 
demption laid, for healing is not needed where there is no pain or 
suffering. 
Forgiveness is the ANSWER to attack of any kind. 
So is 
attack DEPRIVED of its effects, and hate is answered in the Name of 
Love. 
To you to whom it has been given to save the Son of God from 
crucifixion and from hell and death, all glory be forever. 
For you 


852 Matthew 19:6 “So then, they are no longer two but one flesh. 
Therefore what God has joined 
together, let not man separate.” 


847 


1-837 



Volume I Text 


HAVE power to save the Son of God, because his Father willed that 
it be so. 
And in your hand does ALL salvation lie, to be both offered 
and received as one. 


T 26 H 16. 
To use the power God has given you as He would have it 
used is natural. 
It is NOT arrogant to be as He created you, or to 
make use of what He gave to answer ALL His Son's mistakes, and 
set him free. 
But it IS arrogant to LAY ASIDE the power that He 
gave, and choose a little, senseless wish instead of what He wills. 

The gift of God to you is limitless. 
There is NO circumstance it can¬ 
not answer, and NO problem which is not resolved within its gra¬ 
cious light. 
Abide in peace, where God would have you be. 
And be 
the means whereby your brother finds the peace in which YOUR 
wishes are fulfilled. 
Let us unite in bringing blessing to the world of 
sin and death. 
For what can save each one of us, can save us all. 

There is no difference among the Sons of God. 


T 26 H 17. 
The Unity that specialness denies will save them all, for 
what is One can HAVE no specialness. 
And EVERYTHING belongs 
to each of them. 
No wishes lie between a brother and his own. 
To 
get from one is to deprive them all. 
And yet to bless but one gives 
blessing T(924) -750 to them all as one. 
Your ancient name belongs to 
everyone, as theirs to you. 
Call on your brother's name, and God 
will answer, for on Him you call. 
Could He refuse to answer, when 
He has ALREADY answered all who call on Him? A miracle can 
make no change at all. 
But it CAN make what always has been true 
be RECOGNIZED by those who know it not. 
And by this little gift 
of truth but let to be itself; the Son of God allowed to be himself, and 
all creation freed to call upon the Name of God as one. 
T(925) -75l 853 

T 26 I. 
The Immediacy of Salvation (Notes 1850 11:225) 

T 26 11 . 
The one remaining problem that you have is that you see an 
interval between the TIME when you forgive, and will receive the 
benefits of trust. 
This but reflects the little you would keep between 
YOURSELVES, that you might be a LITTLE separate. 
For time and 


853 December 29, 1967 


1-838 


848 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


space are ONE illusion, which takes different forms. 
If it has been 
projected BEYOND your minds, you think of it as time. 
The nearer it 
is brought to where it IS, the more you think of it in terms of space. 

There is a DISTANCE you would keep apart from one another. 
And 
this space you see as time, because you still believe you are EXTER¬ 
NAL to each other. 
This makes trust impossible. 
And you can NOT 
believe that trust would settle every problem NOW. 


T 26 1 2 . 
Thus do you think it SAFER to remain a LITTLE careful and 
a LITTLE watchful of interests perceived as separate. 
From this per¬ 
ception, you can not conceive of gaining what forgiveness offers 
NOW. 
The interval you think lies in between the giving and receiv¬ 
ing of the gift SEEMS to be one in which you sacrifice, and suffer 
loss. 
You see EVENTUAL salvation; not IMMEDIATE results. 
Salva¬ 
tion IS immediate. 
Unless you so perceive it, you WILL be afraid of 
it, believing that the risk of loss is great between the time its PUR¬ 
POSE is made yours, and its EFFECTS will come to you. 
In this form 
is the error still obscured that is the SOURCE of fear. 
Salvation 
WOULD wipe out the space you see between you still, and let you 
INSTANTLY become as one. 
And it is HERE you fear the loss would 
lie. 


T 26 13. 
Do not project this fear to time, for time is NOT the enemy 
that you perceive. 
Time is as neutral as the body is, except in terms 
of what you see it FOR. 
If you would keep a little SPACE between 
you still, you want a little TIME in which forgiveness is withheld a 
little while. 
This makes the interval BETWEEN the time in which 
forgiveness is withheld and given seem dangerous, with terror justi¬ 
fied. 
But SPACE between you is apparent NOW, and cannot BE per¬ 
ceived in future time. 
No more can it be OVERLOOKED, except 
within the present. 
T(926) -752 FUTURE loss is not your fear. 
But 
PRESENT joining IS your dread. 


T 2614. 
Who can feel desolation except NOW? A FUTURE cause as 
yet HAS no effects. 
And therefore MUST it be that, if you fear, there 
is a PRESENT cause. 
And it is THIS that needs correction, NOT a 
future state. 
The plans YOU make for safety all are laid within the 


849 


1-839 


Volume I Text 


future, where you CANNOT plan. 
No purpose has been GIVEN it 
as yet, and what WILL happen has as yet no cause. 
Who can predict 
effects without a cause? And who could fear effects UNLESS he 
thought they had BEEN caused and judged disastrous NOW? Belief 
in sin arouses fear, and like its cause, is looking forward; looking 
back, but OVERLOOKING what is here and now. 


T 2615. 
Yet only here and now its cause must be, if its effects AL¬ 
READY have been judged as fearful. 
And, in overlooking THIS, is it 
protected and kept separate from healing. 
For a miracle is NOW. 
It 
stands ALREADY there, in present grace, within the only interval of 
time which sin and fear have overlooked, but which is all there IS to 
time. 
The working out of ALL correction takes no time at all. 
But the 
ACCEPTANCE of the working out can SEEM to take forever. 
The 
change of purpose the Holy Spirit brought to your relationship has 
IN it all effects that you will see. 
They can be looked at NOW. 
Why 
wait 'til they unfold in time, and fear they may NOT come, although 
already THERE? 

T 26 1 6 . 
You have been told that everything brings good that comes 
from God . 
854 And yet it SEEMS as if this is not so. 
Good in disaster's 
form is difficult to credit in advance. 
Nor is there really SENSE in 
this idea. 
Why SHOULD the good appear in evil's form? And is this 
not deception if it does? Its CAUSE is here, if it appears at all. 
Why 
are not its effects apparent, then? Why in the future? And you seek 
to be content with sighing, and with "reasoning," you do not under¬ 
stand it now, but WILL some day. 
And THEN its meaning will be 
clear. 
This is NOT reason, for it is unjust, and clearly hints at pun¬ 
ishment until the time of liberation is at hand. 
T(927) -753 

T 2617. 
Given a change of purpose for the good, there is NO reason 
for an interval in which disaster strikes, to be perceived as good 
some day, but now in form of pain. 
This is a SACRIFICE of now, 
which COULD not be the cost the Holy Spirit asks for what he gave 


41-4 Romans 8:28 And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those 
who are the called according to His purpose. 



1-840 


850 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


WITHOUT a cost at all. 
Yet this illusion has a cause which, though 
untrue, must be ALREADY in your mind. 
And THIS illusion is but 
one effect which it engenders, and one form in which its outcome is 
perceived. 
This interval in time, when retribution is perceived to be 
the form in which the good appears, is but one aspect of the little 
space that lies between you, unforgiven still. 


T 26 1 8 . 
Be not content with future happiness. 
It has NO meaning, 
and is NOT your just reward. 
For you have cause for freedom 
NOW. 
What profits freedom in a prisoner's form ? 855 Why SHOULD 
deliverance be disguised as death? Delay is senseless, and the rea¬ 
son that would maintain effects of PRESENT cause must be delayed 
until a FUTURE time is merely a denial of the fact that consequence 
and cause MUST come as one. 
Look not to time, but to the little 
space between you still, to be delivered FROM. 
And do not let it be 
DISGUISED as time, and so preserved BECAUSE its form is 
changed, and what it IS cannot be recognized. 
The Holy Spirit's 
purpose NOW is yours. 
Should not His happiness be yours as well? 
T(928) -754 856 

T 26 J. 
For They Have Come (Notes 1856 11:231) 

T 26 J l. 
Think but how holy you must be, from whom the Voice for 
God calls lovingly unto your brother, that you may awake in him 
the Voice that answers to YOUR call. 
And think how holy HE must 
be, when in him sleeps your OWN salvation, with HIS freedom 
joined. 
However much you wish he be condemned, God is in him. 

And never will you know He is in YOU as well, while you attack 
His chosen home, and battle with His host. 
Regard him gently. 
Look 
with loving eyes on him who carries Christ within him, that you 
may behold His glory, and rejoice that Heaven is NOT separate 
from you. 



833 Matthew 16:26 “For what profit is it to a man if he gains the whole world, and loses his own soul? 
Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?” 

856 January 2, 1968 


851 


1-841 



Volume I Text 


T 26 J 2. 
Is it too much to ask a little trust for him who carries Christ 
to you, that you may be forgiven ALL your sins, and left without a 
single one you cherish still. 
Forget not that a shadow held between 
your brother and yourself obscures the Face of Christ and memory 
of God. 
And would you trade Them for an ancient hate? The ground 
whereon you stand is holy ground 857 BECAUSE of Them Who, 
standing there with you, have blessed it with TFFEIR innocence and 
peace . 
858 The blood of hatred fades, to let the grass grow green 
again, and let the flowers be all white and sparkling in the summer 
sun. 
What was a place of death has now become a living temple in a 
world of light. 


T 26 J 3. 
Because of Them. 
It is Their Presence Which has lifted holi¬ 
ness again to take its ancient place upon an ancient throne. 
Because 
of Them have miracles sprung up as grass and flowers on the barren 
ground which hate had scorched and rendered desolate. 
What hate 
has wrought have They undone. 
And now you stand on ground so 
holy Fieaven leans to join with it, and make it like Itself. 
The shadow 
of an ancient hate has gone, and all the blight and withering have 
passed forever from the land where They have come. 
T(929) -755 

T 26 J 4. 
What is a hundred or a thousand years to Them, or tens of 
thousands? When They come, time's purpose is fulfilled. 
What 
never WAS passes to nothingness when They have come. 
What ha¬ 
tred claimed is given up to love, and freedom lights up every living 
thing and lifts it into FFeaven, where the lights grow ever brighter as 
each one comes home. 
The incomplete is made complete again. 
And 
Fieaven's joy has been increased because what is its own has been 
restored to it. 
The bloodied earth is cleansed, and the insane have 
shed their garments of insanity, to join Them on the ground 
whereon you stand. 



837 Exodus 3:4 And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the 
midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. 
And he said, Here am I. 


Exodus 3:5 And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place 
whereon thou standest is holy ground. 


858 Exodus 3:5 Then He said, “Do not draw near this place. 
Take your sandals off your feet, for the 
place where you stand is holy ground.” 


1-842 


852 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


T 26 J 5. 
Heaven is grateful for this gift of what has been withheld so 
long. 
For They have come to gather in Their Own. 
What has been 
blocked is opened; what was held APART from light is given up 
that light may shine on it, and leave no space nor distance lingering 
between the light of Heaven and the world. 
The holiest of all the 
spots on earth is where an ancient hatred has become a present love. 

And They come quickly to the living temple, where a home for 
Them has been set up. 
There is no place in Heaven holier. 
And They 
HAVE come to dwell within the temple offered them, to be THEIR 
resting place as well as YOURS. 


T 26 J 6. 
What hatred has released to love becomes the brightest light 
in Heaven's radiance. 
And all the lights in Heaven brighter grow in 
gratitude for what has been restored. 
Around you angels hover lov¬ 
ingly, to keep away all darkened thoughts of sin, and KEEP the light 
where it has entered in. 
Your footprints lighten up the world, for 
where you walk forgiveness goes with you. 
No-one on earth but of¬ 
fers thanks to one who has restored his home, and sheltered him 
from bitter winter and the freezing cold. 
And shall the Lord of 

Heaven and His Son give LESS in gratitude for so much MORE? 
T(930)-756 

T 26 J 7. 
Now is the temple of the living God rebuilt as host again to 
Him by Whom it was created . 
859 Where He dwells His Son dwells 
with Him, NEVER separate. 
And They give thanks that They are 
welcome made at last. 
Where stood a cross stands now the risen 
Christ, and ancient scars are healed within His sight. 
An ancient 
miracle has come to bless, and to REPLACE an ancient enmity that 
came to kill. 
In gentle gratitude do God the Father AND the Son re¬ 
turn to what is Theirs, and will forever be. 
Now is the Holy Spirit's 


859 Mark 14:58 We heard him say, “I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three 
days I will build another made without hands.” 

1 Corinthians 3:16 Do you not know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God dwells 
in you? 

1 Corinthians 6:19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, 
whom you have from God, and you are not your own? 


853 


1-843 



Volume I Text 


purpose done. 
For They have come! For They have come at last! 
T(931) -757 860 

T 26 K. 
The Remaining Task (Notes 1862 11:236) 

T 26 K l. 
What, then, remains to be undone, for you to REALIZE 
Their Presence? Only this; you have a DIFFERENTIAL view of 
WHEN attack is justified, and WHEN you think it is unfair, and 
NOT to be allowed. 
When you perceive it AS unfair, you think that 
a response of anger now is just. 
And thus you see what IS the same 
as DIFFERENT. 
Confusion is not limited. 
If it occurs at all, it WILL 
be total. 
And its presence, in WHATEVER form, will hide Their 
Presence. 
They are known with clarity, or not at all. 
Confused per¬ 
ception will block knowledge. 
It is NOT a question of the SIZE of 
the confusion, or HOW MUCH it interferes. 
Its simple PRESENCE 
shuts the door to Theirs, and keeps Them there unknown. 


T 26 K 2. 
What does it MEAN if you perceive attack in certain FORMS 
to be unfair to you? It means that there MUST be some forms in 
which YOU THINK IT FAIR. 
For otherwise, how could some be 
evaluated as UNfair? Some, then, are GIVEN meaning, and per¬ 
ceived as sensible. 
And only SOME are seen as meaningLESS. 
And 
this DENIES the fact that ALL are senseless; EQUALLY without a 
cause or consequence, and CANNOT have effects of ANY kind. 

Their Presence is obscured by ANY veil which stands between Their 
shining innocence and your awareness it is your own, and 
EQUALLY belongs to every living thing along with you. 
God limits 
not. 
And what is limited can NOT be Heaven. 
So it MUST be hell. 


T 26 K 3. 
Unfairness and attack are ONE mistake, so firmly joined 
that where one is perceived, the other MUST be seen. 
You cannot BE 
unfairly treated. 
The belief you ARE is but another form of the idea 
you are deprived by someone NOT yourself. 
PROJECTION of the 
cause of sacrifice is at the root of everything perceived to be unfair, 
and NOT your just deserts. 
Yet it is YOU who ask this of yourself, in 
deep injustice to the Son of God. 
You HAVE no enemy except your- 


860 January 8, 1968 


1-844 


854 



Chapter 26 - The Transition 


self, and you are enemy indeed to him, because you do not know 
him AS yourself . 
861 What COULD be more unjust than that he be 
deprived of what he IS, denied the right to be himself, and asked to 
sacrifice his Father's Love and yours, as NOT his due? T(932) -758 

T 26 K 4. 
Beware of the temptation to perceive yourself unfairly 
treated. 
In this view, you seek to find an innocence which is NOT 
Theirs, but yours alone, and at the cost of someone ELSE's guilt. 
Can 
innocence be purchased by the giving of YOUR guilt to someone 
else? And IS this innocence, which your attack on him attempts to 
get? Is it not retribution for your own attack upon the Son of God 
you seek? Is it not SAFER to believe that you are innocent of this, 
and victimized DESPITE your innocence? Whatever way the game 
of guilt is played, THERE MUST BE LOSS. 
Someone must LOSE his 
innocence that someone ELSE can take it from him, making it his 
own. 


T 26 K 5. 
You think your brother is unfair to you BECAUSE you think 
that one must be unfair to MAKE the other innocent. 
And in this 
game do you perceive one PURPOSE of your whole relationship. 

And this you seek to ADD unto the purpose GIVEN it. 
The Floly 
Spirit's purpose is to let the Presence of your holy Guests be known 
to you. 
And TO this purpose nothing CAN be added, for the world 
is purposeless except for this. 
To add or take away from this ONE 
goal is but to take away ALL purpose from the world, and from 
yourself. 
And each unfairness that the world appears to lay upon 
you, you have laid on it, by rendering it purposeless, without the 
function that the Floly Spirit sees. 
And simple justice has been thus 
denied to every living thing upon the earth. 


T 26 K 6. 
What this injustice does to you who judge unfairly, and who 
see as you have judged, you cannot calculate. 
The world grows dim 
and threatening, and not a trace of all the happy sparkle that salva- 


861 Mathew 5:43-45 “Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine 
enemy: but I say unto you, love your enemies, and pray for them that persecute you; that ye may be 
sons of your Father who is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth 
rain on the just and the unjust.” 


855 


1-845 



Volume I Text 


tion brought can you perceive, to lighten up your way. 
And so you 
see YOURSELF deprived of light, abandoned to the dark, unfairly 
left without a purpose in a futile world. 
The world is fair because 
the Holy Spirit has brought injustice to the Light within, and there 
has ALL unfairness been resolved, and been REPLACED with jus¬ 
tice and with love. 
If you perceive injustice anywhere, you need but 
say, T(933) -759 "By this do I DENY the Presence of the Father and the 
Son. 
And I would rather know of Them than see injustice, which 
Their Presence shines away." T(934) -760 862 


862 January 19,1967 


1-846 


PROOF 


856 


COPY 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 

T 27 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1868 12:3) 

T 27 A l. 
The wish to be unfairly treated is a compromise attempt that 
would COMBINE attack and innocence. 
Who can combine the 
wholly incompatible, and make a unity of what can NEVER join? 
Walk you the gentle way, and you will fear no evil and no shadows 
in the night . 
863 But place no terror symbols on the path, or you will 
weave a crown of thorns from which your brother and yourself will 
NOT escape . 
864 You CANNOT crucify yourself alone. 
And if you are 
unfairly treated, he MUST suffer the unfairness that you see. 
You 
CANNOT sacrifice yourself alone. 
For sacrifice is total If it could 
occur at all, it would entail the whole of God's creation, and the Fa¬ 
ther with the sacrifice of his beloved Son . 
865 

T 27 A 2. 
In your RELEASE from sacrifice is HIS made manifest, and 
shown to be his own. 
But every pain you suffer do you see as proof 
that HE is guilty of attack. 
Thus would you make yourself to be the 
sign that he has LOST his innocence, and need but look on you to 
realize that HE has been condemned. 
And what to YOU has been 
unfair will come to HIM in righteousness. 
The unjust vengeance that 
you suffer now belongs to HIM, and when it RESTS on him, are 
YOU set free. 
Wish not to make yourself a living symbol of his guilt, 
for you will NOT escape the death you make for him, and in HIS 
innocence you find your own. 



863 Psalm 23:4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, 

I will fear no evil; 

For You are with me; 

Your rod and Your staff, they comfort me. 


864 Matthew 27:29 When they had twisted a crown of thorns, they put it on His head, and a reed in His 
right hand. 
And they bowed the knee before Him and mocked Him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” 

865 Hosea 6:6 For I desire mercy and not sacrifice, And the knowledge of God more than burnt 
offerings.; Also: Matthew 9:13 But go and learn what this means: “I desire mercy and not sacrifice. 

For I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.” 


857 


1-847 



Volume I Text 

T 27 B. 
The Picture of the Crucifixion (Notes 1869 12:4) 

T 27 B 1. 
Whenever you consent to suffer pain, to be deprived, un¬ 
fairly treated, or in need of ANYTHING, you but accuse your 
brother of attack upon God's Son. 
You hold a picture of your cruci¬ 
fixion before his eyes, that he may see his sins are writ in Heaven in 
your blood and death, and go before him, closing off the gate, and 
damning him to hell. 
Yet this is writ in hell and NOT in Heaven, 
where you are BEYOND attack, and prove his INNOCENCE. 
The 
picture of yourself you offer him you show YOURSELF, and give it 
all your faith. 
The Holy Spirit offers you, to give to him, a picture of 
yourself in which there is T(935) -761 NO pain and NO reproach at all. 

And what was martyred to his guilt becomes the perfect witness to 
his innocence. 


T 27 B 2. 
The power of witness is beyond belief, because it brings con¬ 
viction in its wake. 
The witness is believed BECAUSE he points be¬ 
yond himself, to what he REPRESENTS. 
A sick and suffering you 
but represents your brother's guilt; the witness which you send, lest 
he forget the injuries he gave, from which you swear he never will 
escape. 
This sick and sorry picture YOU accept, if only it can serve 
to punish him. 
The sick are merciless to everyone, and in contagion 
do they seek to kill. 
Death seems an easy price, if they can say, "Be¬ 
hold me, brother, at your hand I die." For sickness is the witness to 
his guilt, and death would prove his errors MUST be sins. 


T 27 B 3. 
Sickness is but a "little" death; a form of vengeance not yet 
total. 
Yet it speaks with certainty for what it represents. 
The bleak 
and bitter picture you have sent your brother, YOU have looked 
upon in grief. 
And everything that it has shown to him have you 
believed, BECAUSE it witnessed to the guilt in him, which you per¬ 
ceived and loved. 
Now in the hands made gentle by His touch, the 
Holy Spirit lays a picture of a DIFFERENT you. 
It is a picture of a 
body still, for what you REALLY are can not be seen nor pictured. 

But THIS one has NOT been used for purpose of attack, and there¬ 
fore never suffered pain at all. 
IT witnesses to the eternal truth that 


1-848 


858 


Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


you can not BE hurt, and points BEYOND itself to both YOUR inno¬ 
cence and HIS. 


T 27 B 4. 
Show THIS unto your brother, who will see that every scar is 
healed, and every tear is wiped away in laughter and in love . 
866 And 
he will look on his forgiveness there, and with healed eyes will look 
BEYOND it, to the innocence that he beholds in you. 
Here is the 
proof that he has NEVER sinned; that NOTHING that his madness 
bid him do was ever done, or ever had effects of any kind. 
That NO 
reproach he laid upon his heart was EVER justified, and NO attack 
can touch him with the poisoned sting of fear. 
Attest his T(936) -762 
innocence and NOT his guilt. 
YOUR healing is his comfort and HIS 
health. 
BECAUSE it proves illusions were not true. 


T 27 B 5. 
It is not Will for Life, but wish for death, that is the motiva¬ 
tion for this world. 
Its ONLY purpose is TO PROVE GUILT REAL. 

No worldly thought or act or feeling has a motivation other than 
this one. 
These are the witnesses that are called forth to be believed, 
and lend conviction to the system they speak for and represent. 
And 
each has many voices, speaking to your brother and yourself in dif¬ 
ferent tongues. 
And yet to both the message is the same. 
Adornment 
of the body seeks to show how lovely are the witnesses for guilt. 

Concerns about the body demonstrate how frail and vulnerable is 
your life; how easily destroyed is what you love. 
Depression speaks 
of death and vanity of real concern with anything at all. 


T 27 B 6. 
The strongest witness to futility, which bolsters all the rest 
and helps them paint the picture in which sin is justified, is sickness 
in whatever form it takes. 
The sick have reason for each one of their 
unnatural desires and strange needs. 
For who could live a life so 
soon cut short, and NOT esteem the worth of passing joys? What 
pleasures COULD there be that will endure? Are not the frail ENTI- 


866 Isaiah 25:8 He will swallow up death forever. 
And the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from all 
faces; The rebuke of His people He will take away from all the earth; For the LORD has spoken. 

Revelation 7:17 For the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne will shepherd them and lead them to 
living fountains of waters. 
And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes. 


Revelation 21:4 And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes; there shall be no more death, nor 
sorrow, nor crying. 
There shall be no more pain, for the former things have passed away. 



859 


1-849 



Volume I Text 


TLED to believe that every stolen scrap of pleasure is their righteous 
payment for their little lives? Their death will pay the price for all of 
them, if they enjoy the benefits or not. 
The end of life must come, 
whatever way that life be spent. 
And so take pleasure in the quickly 
passing and ephemeral. 


T 27 B 7. 
These are NOT sins, but witnesses unto the strange belief 
that sin and death are real, and innocence and sin will end alike, 
within the termination of the grave. 
If this were true, there WOULD 
be reason to remain content to seek for passing joys, and cherish lit¬ 
tle pleasures where you can. 
But in this picture is the body NOT 
perceived as neutral and WITHOUT a goal inherent in itself. 
For it 
becomes the symbol of reproach, T(937) -763 the sign of guilt whose 
consequences still are there to see, so that the cause can NEVER be 
denied. 
Your function is to PROVE to him that sin can HAVE no 
cause. 
How futile MUST it be to see yourself a picture of the proof 
that what your function IS can never be. 


T 27 B 8. 
The Holy Spirit's picture changes not the body into some¬ 
thing it is not. 
It only takes away from it ALL signs of accusation 
and of blamefulness. 
Pictured WITHOUT a purpose, it is seen as 
neither sick nor well, nor bad nor good. 
No grounds are offered that 
it may be judged in ANY way at all. 
It has no life, but neither is it 
dead. 
It stands apart from ALL experience of fear OR love. 
For now 
it witnesses to NOTHING yet, its purpose being open, and the mind 
made free again to choose what it is FOR. 
Now it is not condemned, 
but waiting for a purpose to be GIVEN, that it may fulfill the func¬ 
tion that it will receive. 


T 27 B 9. 
Into this empty space, from which the GOAL of sin has been 
removed, is Heaven free to be remembered. 
Here its peace can 
come, and perfect healing take the place of death. 
The body can be¬ 
come a sign of life, a promise of redemption, and a breath of immor¬ 
tality to those grown sick of breathing in the fetid scent of death. 
Let 
it have healing as its PURPOSE. 
Then will it send forth the message 
it received, and by its health and loveliness proclaim the truth and 
value that it represents. 
Let it receive the power to represent an end- 


1-850 


860 


Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


less life, forever unattacked. 
And to your brother let its message be, 
"Behold me, brother, at your hand I live." 

T 27 B to. 
The simple way to let this be achieved is merely this; to let 
the body have no purpose from the past, when you were sure you 
KNEW its purpose was to foster guilt. 
For this insists your crippled 
picture is a lasting sign of what it represents. 
This leaves no space in 
which a DIFFERENT view, ANOTHER purpose, can be given it. 


You do NOT know its purpose. 
You but gave ILLUSIONS of a pur¬ 
pose to a thing you made to hide your function from yourself. 
This 
thing WITHOUT a purpose CANNOT hide the function that the 
Holy Spirit gave. 
Let, then, ITS purpose and YOUR function both be 
reconciled at last, and seen as one. 
T(938) -76 4 867 

T 27 C. 
The Fear of Healing (Notes 1877 12:12) 

T 27 C 1 . 
Is healing frightening? To many, yes. 
For accusation is a bar 
to love, and damaged bodies ARE accusers. 
They stand firmly in the 
way of trust and peace, proclaiming that the frail can HAVE no 
trust, and that the damaged HAVE no grounds for peace. 
Who has 
been injured BY his brother, and could love and trust him still? He 
HAS attacked, and will attack again. 
Protect him not, because your 
damaged body shows that you must be protected FROM him. 
To 
forgive may be an act of charity, but NOT his due. 
He may be PIT¬ 
IED for his guilt, but NOT exonerated. 
And if you forgive him his 
transgressions, you but ADD to all the guilt that he has really 
earned . 
868 

T 27 C 2. 
The unhealed CANNOT pardon. 
For they are the witnesses 
that pardon is unfair. 
They would retain the CONSEQUENCES of 
the guilt they overlook. 
Yet no-one CAN forgive a sin which he be- 


67 January 22, 1968 

868 Matthew 6:12 “And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.” 

Here we see a larger understanding of “forgiveness” indicated, than the coon view of “forgiving the 
guilty wretch for his horrid sin.” In the later Song of Prayer , the distinction between this genuine 
forgiveness and “forgiveness to destroy” is elaborated. 
The point is not that you first judge your brother 
guilty and then forgive him for his real sins, but that you realize that your judgement of him as sinner 
was an illusion, and never was God’s view of your brother, or of you. 
In this lies true forgiveness and 
thus true salvation. 
See also T 27 C 1. 



861 


1-851 




Volume I Text 


lieves is real. 
And what has consequences MUST be real, because 
what it has DONE is there to see. 
Forgiveness is NOT pity, which 
but seeks to pardon what it knows to be the truth. 
Good cannot BE 
returned for evil, for forgiveness does not first ESTABLISH sin, and 
THEN forgive it . 
869 Who can say and MEAN, "My brother, you have 
injured me, and yet, because I am the BETTER of the two, I pardon 
you my hurt." HIS pardon and YOUR hurt can NOT exist together. 

One DENIES the other, and MUST make it false. 


T 27 C 3. 
To witness sin, and yet forgive it, is a paradox which reason 
cannot see. 
For it maintains what has been done to you DESERVES 
no pardon. 
And, by GIVING it, you grant your brother mercy, but 
retain the proof he is not REALLY innocent. 
The sick remain accus¬ 
ers. 
They cannot forgive their brothers AND themselves as well. 
For 
no-one in whom true forgiveness reigns CAN suffer. 
He holds not 
the proof of sin, before his brother's eyes. 
And thus he MUST have 
overlooked it, and removed it from his own . 
870 Forgiveness CAN¬ 
NOT be for one, and not the other. 
Who forgives IS healed. 
And in 
his healing lies the PROOF that he has truly pardoned, and retains 
no trace of condemnation that T(939) -765 he still would hold against 
himself or any living thing. 


T 27 C 4. 
Forgiveness is not real UNLESS it brings a healing to your 
brother AND yourself. 
YOU must attest his sins had no effect on 
YOU, to demonstrate they were not real. 
How else COULD he be 
guiltless? And how COULD his innocence be justified UNLESS his 
sins have no effect to WARRANT guilt? Sins are beyond forgiveness 
just BECAUSE they would entail effects which CANNOT be undone 
and overlooked entirely. 
In their UNDOING lies the proof that they 
were merely errors. 
LET yourself be healed, that you may be forgiv¬ 
ing, offering salvation to your brother AND yourself. 
A broken 


869 See above. 


870 Matthew 7:3-5 ‘‘And why do you look at the speck in your brother’s eye, but do not consider the 
plank in your own eye? Or how can you say to your brother, “Let me remove the speck from your eye”; 
and look, a plank is in your own eye? Hypocrite! First remove the plank from your own eye, and then 
you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.” 


1-852 


862 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


body shows the mind has NOT been healed. 
A miracle of healing 
proves that separation is WITHOUT effect. 


T 27 C 5. 
What you would prove to him you will believe. 
The power 
of witness COMES from your belief. 
And everything you say or do 
or think but testifies to what you teach to him. 
Your body can be 
means to teach that it has never suffered pain because of him. 
And 
in its healing can it offer him mute testimony to his innocence. 
It is 
THIS testimony that can speak with power greater than a thousand 
tongues. 
For here is his forgiveness PROVED to him. 
A miracle can 
offer nothing LESS to him than it has given unto you. 
So does your 
healing show your mind is healed, and has forgiven what he did 
NOT do. 
And so is HE convinced his innocence was never lost, and 
healed along with you. 


T 27 C 6. 
Thus does the miracle undo all things the world attests can 
never BE undone. 
And hopelessness and death MUST disappear 
before the ancient clarion call of life. 
This call has power FAR be¬ 
yond the weak and miserable cry of death and guilt. 
The ancient 
Calling of the Father to His Son, and of the Son unto his own, will 
yet be the last trumpet that the world will ever hear . 
871 Brother, there 
is no death . 
872 And this you learn when you but wish to show your 
brother that you had no hurt of him. 
He thinks your blood is on his 
hands, and so he stands condemned. 
But it is given you T(940) -766 to 
SHOW him, by your healing, that his guilt is but the fabric of a 
senseless dream. 


T 27 C 7. 
How just are miracles! For they bestow an equal gift of full 
deliverance from guilt upon your brother AND yourself. 
YOUR 


871 Joel 2:1 Blow the trumpet in Zion, 

And sound an alarm in My holy mountain! 

Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble; 

For the day of the LORD is coming, 

For it is at hand: 

1 Corinthians 15:52 In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. 
For the trumpet will 
sound, and the dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. 


872 2 Timothy 1:10 But has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel, 

Revelation 21:4 And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes; there shall be no more death, nor 
sorrow, nor crying. 
There shall be no more pain, for the former things have passed away.” 


863 


1-853 



Volume I Text 


healing saves HIM pain, as well as you. 
And YOU are healed BE¬ 
CAUSE you wished him well. 
This is the law the miracle obeys; That 
healing sees no specialness at all. 
It does NOT come from pity, but 
from love. 
And love would prove ALL suffering is but a vain imag¬ 
ining, a foolish wish with NO effects. 
Your health is a result of your 
desire to see your brother with no blood upon his hands , 873 nor guilt 
upon his heart made heavy with the proof of sin. 
And what you 
wish is GIVEN you to see. 


T 27 C 8. 
The "cost" of your serenity is his. 
This is the "price" the 
Holy Spirit and the world interpret differently. 
The world perceives 
in it a statement of the "fact" that your salvation SACRIFICES his. 

The Holy Spirit knows YOUR healing is the witness UNTO his, and 
CANNOT be apart from him at all. 
As long as he consents to suffer, 
YOU will be unhealed. 
But you can show him his suffering is pur¬ 
poseless and wholly without cause. 
Show him YOUR healing, and 
he will consent no more to suffer. 
For his innocence HAS BEEN es¬ 
tablished in your sight AND his. 
And laughter will REPLACE your 
sighs BECAUSE God's Son remembered that he IS God's Son. 


T 27 C 9. 
Who, then, fears healing? Only those to whom their 
brother's sacrifice and pain is seen to represent their own serenity. 

Their helplessness and weakness represent grounds on which they 
justify his pain. 
The constant sting of guilt he suffers serves to prove 
that he is slave, and they are free. 
The constant pain THEY suffer 
demonstrates that they are free BECAUSE they hold him bound. 


And sickness is desired to prevent a shift of balance in the sacrifice. 

How could the Holy Spirit be deterred an instant, even less, to rea¬ 
son with an argument for sickness such as this? And need YOUR 
healing be delayed because you pause to listen to insanity? T(94l) - 
76 7 874 


873 The Urtext manuscript has the singular “hand” typed here. 
The Notes has the plural, “hands” and the 
HLC corrects it to “hands.” We’re calling this a typo in the Urtext and we’re agreeing with the Notes 
and the HLC that it was meant to be plural. 


874 January 24, 1968 


1-854 


864 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


T 27 C 10. 
Correction is NOT your function. 
It belongs to One Who 
knows of fairness, NOT of guilt. 
If you assume correction's role, you 
LOSE the function of forgiveness. 
No-one can forgive until he learns 
correction is BUT to forgive, and NEVER to accuse. 
Alone, you 
CANNOT see they are the same, and therefore is correction NOT of 
you. 
Identity and function are the same, and BY your function do 
you know yourself. 
And thus, if you confuse your function with the 
function of Another, you MUST be confused about yourself and 
who you are. 
What is the separation but a wish to take God's Func¬ 
tion from Him and DENY that it is His? Yet if it is NOT His it is not 
YOURS, for YOU must lose what you would take away. 


T 27 C ll. 
In a split mind, identity MUST seem to be divided. 
Nor can 
anyone perceive a function unified which has conflicting purposes 
and different ends. 
Correction, to a mind so split, MUST be a way to 
punish sins you think are YOURS in someone else. 
And thus does 
he become your victim, NOT your brother, DIFFERENT from you in 
that he is MORE GUILTY, thus in need of your correction, as the one 
MORE INNOCENT than he. 
This splits HIS function off from yours, 
and gives you both a DIFFERENT role. 
And so you CANNOT be 
perceived as one, and with a single function that would MEAN a 
shared identity with but ONE end. 


T 27 C 12. 
Correction YOU would do MUST separate, because that is 
the function given it BY you. 
When you perceive correction is the 
SAME as pardon, then you also know the Holy Spirit's Mind and 
yours are One. 
And so your OWN identity is found. 
Yet must He 
work with what is GIVEN Him, and you allow Him only HALF 
your mind. 
And thus He represents the OTHER half, and seems to 
have a DIFFERENT purpose from the one you cherish, and you 
THINK is yours. 
Thus does your function seem DIVIDED, with a 
half IN OPPOSITION to a half. 
And these two halves appear to rep¬ 
resent a split within a self perceived as two. 
T(942) -768 
T 27 C 13. 
Consider how this self perception MUST extend, and do 
not overlook the fact that EVERY thought extends, because that is its 
purpose, being what it really IS. 
From an idea of self AS TWO, there 


865 


1-855 


Volume I Text 


comes a NECESSARY view of function split BETWEEN the two. 


And what you would correct is only HALF the error, which you 
think is ALL of it. 
Your BROTHER'S sins become the central target 
for correction, lest your errors and his own be seen as one. 
YOURS 
are mistakes, but HIS are sins, and NOT the same as yours. 
HIS 
merit punishment, while yours, in fairness, should be overlooked. 


T 27 C 14. 
In THIS interpretation of correction, your own mistakes 
you will not even SEE. 
The FOCUS of correction has been placed 
OUTSIDE yourself, on one who CANNOT be a part of you while 
this perception lasts. 
What is condemned can never be returned to 
its accuser, who has hated it, AND HATES IT STILL. 
This is your 
brother, focus of your hate, unworthy to be part of you, and thus 
OUTSIDE your self, the other half, which is denied. 
Only what is 
left, WITHOUT his presence, is perceived as ALL of you. 
To this 
remaining half the Holy Spirit must represent the OTHER half, until 
you recognize it IS the other half. 
And this He does by giving BOTH 
of you a function that is one, NOT different. 


T 27 C 15. 
Correction IS the function given both, but neither one alone. 

And when it is fulfilled as SHARED, it MUST correct mistakes in 
both of you. 
It CANNOT leave mistakes in one unhealed, and make 
the other free. 
THAT is DIVIDED purpose, which cannot BE shared, 
and so it CANNOT be the function which the Holy Spirit sees as 
His. 
And you can rest assured that He will NOT fulfill a function 
that He cannot understand, and recognize as His. 
For only thus can 
He keep YOURS preserved intact, DESPITE your separated 875 view 
of what your function IS. 
If He UPHELD divided function, you were 
lost indeed. 
His INABILITY to see His goal divided and distinct for 
each of you preserves your Self from being made aware of any func¬ 
tion OTHER than Its Own. 
T(943) -769 


773 The Urtext manuscript has this as “separate view” which the HLC changes to “separate views” 
which sounds better. 
However the Notes has it as “separated view” which is a rather different idea and 
which fits the context much better. 
We’re thus calling this a typing mistake in the Urtext and restoring 
it to the Notes reading by changing “separate” to “separated” here. 



1-856 


866 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


T 27 C 16. 
And thus is healing given BOTH of you. 
Correction MUST 
be left to One Who knows correction and forgiveness ARE the same. 

With HALF a mind, this is NOT understood. 
Leave, then, correction 
to the Mind That IS united, functioning as One BECAUSE It is not 
split in purpose, and conceives a single function as Its ONLY one. 

Here is the function GIVEN It conceived to be Its Own, and NOT 
apart from that Its Giver keeps BECAUSE it has been shared. 
In His 
ACCEPTANCE of this function lies the means whereby your mind 
is unified. 
His SINGLE purpose unifies the halves of you that you 
perceive as separate. 
And each forgives the other, that he may ac¬ 
cept his OTHER half as PART of him. 
T(944) -770 876 

T 27 D. 
The Symbol of the Impossible (Notes 1890 12:25) 

T 27 D l. 
Power can NOT oppose. 
For opposition would WEAKEN it, 
and weakened power is a contradiction in ideas. 
Weak strength is 
meaningless. 
And power used to weaken is EMPLOYED to limit. 

Thus it MUST be limited and weak, because that is its purpose. 

Power is UNopposed, to be itself. 
No weakness CAN intrude upon 
it without changing what it IS, to something it is not. 
To weaken IS 
to limit, and impose an opposite that CONTRADICTS the concept it 
attacks. 
And BY its contradiction does it JOIN to the idea a some¬ 
thing it is not, and make it unintelligible. 
Who can understand a 
double concept, such as "weakened-power," or as "hateful-love?" 

T 27 D 2. 
You have decided that your brother IS a symbol for a "hate¬ 
ful-love," a "weakened-power," and, above all, a "living-death." 
And so he has NO meaning to you, for he stands for what is mean¬ 
ingless. 
He represents a double thought, where half is cancelled out 
by the remaining half. 
Yet even this is quickly contradicted by the 
half it cancelled out, and so they BOTH are gone. 
And now he 
stands for nothing. 
Symbols which but represent ideas that cannot 
BE, must stand for empty space and nothingness. 
Yet nothingness 
and empty space can NOT be interference. 
What CAN interfere with 


876 Jan. 
26, 1968 


867 


1-857 



Volume I Text 


the awareness of reality is the belief that there is SOMETHING 
THERE. 


T 27 D 3. 
The picture of your brother that you see means nothing. 

There is nothing to attack or to deny; to love or hate, or to endow 
with power or to see as weak. 
The picture has been wholly cancelled 
out, because it symbolized a contradiction which cancelled out the 
THOUGHT it represents. 
And thus the picture has no cause at all. 

Who can perceive effect WITHOUT a cause? What can the causeless 
BE but nothingness. 
The picture of your brother that you see is 
wholly absent, and has never been. 
Let, then, the empty space it oc¬ 
cupies be RECOGNIZED as vacant, and the time devoted to its see¬ 
ing be perceived as idly spent, a time unoccupied. 
T(945) -771 

T 27 D 4. 
An empty space that is NOT seen as filled, an unused inter¬ 
val of time NOT seen as spent and fully occupied, become a silent 
invitation to the truth to enter, and to make Itself at home. 
No 
preparation CAN be made that would enhance the invitation's real 
appeal. 
For what you leave as vacant GOD will fill, and where HE 
is, there MUST the truth abide. 
Unweakened Power, with NO oppo¬ 
site, is what creation IS. 
For this there are NO symbols. 
Nothing 
points BEYOND the truth, and what can stand for MORE than eve¬ 
rything? Yet true undoing must be kind, and so the first replace¬ 
ment for your picture is ANOTHER picture, of ANOTHER kind. 


T 27 D 5. 
As nothingness can not BE pictured, so there IS no symbol 
for totality. 
Reality is ultimately known WITHOUT a form, unpic¬ 
tured and unseen. 
Forgiveness is not yet a Power known as wholly 
free of limits. 
Yet it sets no limits YOU have chosen to impose. 
For¬ 
giveness is the means by which the truth is represented TEMPO¬ 
RARILY. 
It lets the Holy Spirit make EXCHANGE of pictures possi¬ 
ble, until the time when aids are meaningless, and learning done. 


No learning aid has use which can extend BEYOND the goal of 
learning. 
When its aim HAS BEEN accomplished, it is functionless. 

Yet, in the learning interval, it HAS a use which now you fear, but 
yet will love. 



1-858 


868 


Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


T 27 D 6. 
The picture of your brother GIVEN you to occupy the space 
so lately left unoccupied and vacant, will not need defense of ANY 
kind. 
For you will give it OVERWHELMING preference. 
Nor delay 
an instant in deciding that it is the ONLY one you want. 
It does 
NOT stand for double concepts. 
Though it is but HALF the picture, 
and IS incomplete, WITHIN itself it is the same. 
The other half of 
what it represents remains unknown, but is NOT cancelled out. 
And 
thus is God left free to take the final step Himself. 
For this you need 
NO pictures and NO learning aids. 
And what will ultimately take 
the place of EVERY learning aid will merely BE. 
T(946) -772 

T 27 D 7. 
Forgiveness vanishes and symbols fade, and nothing that 
the eyes have ever seen, or ears have heard, remains to be per¬ 
ceived . 
877 A Power wholly limitless has come, NOT to destroy, but 
to RECEIVE Its Own. 
There is no CHOICE of function anywhere. 

The choice you fear to lose you never HAD. 
Yet only this APPEARS 
to interfere with power unlimited and SINGLE thoughts, complete 
and happy, WITHOUT opposite. 
You do not know the peace of 
power which opposes NOTHING. 
Yet no OTHER kind can be at all. 

Give welcome to the Power beyond forgiveness, and beyond the 
world of symbols and of limitations. 
He would merely BE, and so 
He merely IS. 
T(947) -773 878 

T 27 E. 
The Quiet Answer (Notes 1896 12:31) 

T 27 E 1. 
In quietness are all things answered, and is every problem 
quietly resolved. 
In conflict there can BE no answer and no resolu¬ 
tion. 
For its PURPOSE is to make NO resolution possible, and to en¬ 
sure NO answer will be plain. 
A problem set in conflict HAS no an- 


777 1 Corinthians 2:9 For since the beginning of the world 
Men have not heard nor perceived by the ear, 

Nor has the eye seen any God besides You, 

Who acts for the one who waits for Him. 
Isaiah 64:4 
But as it is written: 

“Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, 

Nor have entered into the heart of man 

The things which God has prepared for those who love Him.” 

878 January 30, 1968 


869 


1-859 



Volume I Text 


swer, for it is seen in different ways. 
And what would be an answer 
from one point of view is NOT an answer in another light. 
You ARE 
in conflict. 
Thus it must be clear you cannot answer anything at all, 
for conflict HAS no limited effects. 
Yet, if God gave an Answer, 
there MUST be a way in which your problems are resolved, for what 
He wills already has been done. 


T 27 E 2. 
Thus it MUST be that time is not involved, and every prob¬ 
lem can be answered now. 
Yet it must also be that in your state of 
mind, solution is impossible. 
Therefore, God must have given you a 
way of reaching to ANOTHER state of mind, in which the answer is 
ALREADY THERE. 
Such is the Holy Instant. 
It is here that ALL 
your problems should be brought and LEFT. 
Here they BELONG, 
for here THEIR answer is. 
And where its answer is, a problem 
MUST be simple and be easily resolved. 
It MUST be pointless to at¬ 
tempt to solve a problem where the answer cannot be. 
Yet, just as 
surely, it MUST be resolved, if it is brought to where the answer IS. 


T 27 E 3. 
Attempt to solve NO problems but within the Holy Instant's 
surety. 
For there the problem WILL be answered and resolved. 
Out¬ 
side, there will be no solution, for there IS no answer there that 
could be found. 
Nowhere outside a single simple question is ever 
ASKED. 
The world can ONLY ask a double question, with MANY 
answers, none of which will do. 
It does not ask a question to BE an¬ 
swered, but only to restate its point of view. 
All questions asked 
within this world are but a way of LOOKING, NOT a question 
asked. 
A question asked in hate cannot be answered, because it IS an 
answer in itself. 
A double question asks and answers, both attesting 
the same thing, in different form. 
T(948) -774 

T 27 E 4. 
The world asks but one question. 
It is this: "Of these illu¬ 
sions, which of them are true? Which ones establish peace and offer 
joy? And which can bring escape from all the pain of which this 
world is made?" Whatever form the question takes, its purpose is 
the same. 
It asks but to ESTABLISH sin is real, and answers in the 
form of preference. 
"Which sin do you prefer?" That is the one that 
you should choose. 
The OTHERS are not true. 
What can the body 


1-860 


870 


Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


get that you would want the most of all? It is your servant and your 
friend. 
But tell it what you want, and it will serve you lovingly and 
well. 
And this is NOT a question, for it TELLS you WHAT you 
want, and WHERE to go to ask for it. 
It leaves no room to question 
its beliefs, except that what it states takes question's FORM. 


T 27 E 5. 
A pseudo-question has no answer. 
It DICTATES the answer, 
even as it asks. 
Thus is all questioning within the world a form of 
propaganda for itself. 
Just as the body's witnesses are but the senses 
from WITHIN itself, so are the answers to the questions of the world 
contained within the questions. 
Where answers represent the QUES¬ 
TIONS they add nothing new, and nothing has been learned. 
An 
HONEST question is a learning tool which asks for something that 
you do NOT know. 
It does NOT set conditions for response, but 
merely asks what the RESPONSE should be. 
And no-one in a con¬ 
flict state is free to ASK this question, for he does not WANT an 
honest answer, where the conflict ENDS. 


T 27 E 6. 
Only within the Holy Instant can an honest question hon¬ 
estly be asked. 
And from the meaning of the QUESTION does the 
meaningfulness of the answer come. 
Here is it possible to separate 
your wishes FROM the answer, so it can be GIVEN you, and also be 
RECEIVED. 
The answer is provided everywhere, but it is only here 
it can be HEARD. 
An honest answer asks NO sacrifice, because it 
answers questions truly asked. 
The questions of the world but ask of 
whom is sacrifice demanded, asking NOT if sacrifice is meaningful 
at all. 
And so, UNLESS the answer tells "of whom," it will remain 
unrecognized, unheard, and thus the QUESTION is preserved in¬ 
tact, because it gave the answer to ITSELF. 
T(949) -775 
T 27 E 7. 
The Holy Instant is the interval in which the mind is still 
enough to hear an answer that is NOT entailed within the question 
asked. 
It offers something new and DIFFERENT from the question. 

How COULD it be answered, if it but repeats itself. 
Therefore, at¬ 
tempt to solve NO problem in a world from which the answer has 
been barred. 
But bring the problem to the only place which holds 
the answer lovingly FOR you. 
Here are the answers which will 


871 


1-861 


Volume I Text 


SOLVE your problems, because they stand APART from them, and 
see what CAN be answered; what the QUESTION is. 
Within the 
world, the answers merely raise ANOTHER question, though they 
leave the first unanswered. 
In the holy instant, you can bring the 
question TO the answer, and receive the answer that was MADE for 
you. 
T(950) -776 879 

T 27 F. 
The Healing Example (Notes 190112:36) 

T 27 F l. 
The ONLY way to heal is to be healed. 
The miracle extends 
WITHOUT your help. 
But you ARE needed that it can BEGIN. 
AC¬ 
CEPT the miracle of healing, and it WILL go forth, because of what 
it IS. 
It is its NATURE to extend itself the instant it is born. 
And it is 
born the instant it is offered and RECEIVED. 
No-one can ask AN¬ 
OTHER to be healed. 
But he can let HIMSELF be healed, and thus 
offer the other what he has received. 
Who can bestow upon another 
what he does not HAVE? And who can SHARE what he denies 
HIMSELF? The Holy Spirit speaks to YOU. 
He does not speak to 
someone ELSE. 
Yet BY your listening. 
His Voice extends, BECAUSE 
you have accepted what He says. 


T 27 F 2. 
Health is the witness unto health. 
As long as it is unattested, 
it remains without conviction. 
Only when DEMONSTRATED has it 
BEEN proved, and MUST compel belief. 
No-one is healed through 
double messages. 
If you wish ONLY to be healed, you heal. 
Your 
single PURPOSE makes this possible. 
But if you are AFRAID of 
healing, then it cannot come through you. 
The ONLY thing that is 
required for a healing is a lack of fear. 
The fearful are NOT healed, 
and cannot heal. 
This does NOT mean the conflict must be gone for¬ 
ever from your mind. 
For if it were, there were no NEED for healing 
any more. 
But it DOES mean, if only for an instant, you love without 
attack. 
An instant is sufficient. 
Miracles wait not on time. 


T 27 F 3. 
The holy instant is the miracle's abiding-place. 
From there, 
each one is born into this world, as witness to a state of mind which 
has TRANSCENDED conflict, and has reached to peace. 
It carries 


879 Feb. 
1, 1968 


1-862 


872 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


comfort from the place of peace into the battleground, and DEM¬ 
ONSTRATES that war has no effects. 
For all the hurt that war has 
sought to bring; the broken bodies and the shattered limbs, the 
screaming dying and the silent dead, are gently lifted up and com¬ 
forted. 
There IS no sadness, where a miracle has come to heal. 
And 
nothing more than just ONE instant of your love WITHOUT attack 
is necessary, that all this occur. 
T(951) -777 

T 27 F 4. 
In that ONE instant are YOU healed, and in that single in¬ 
stant is ALL healing done. 
What stands APART from you, when 
you accept the blessing that the holy instant brings? Be not afraid of 
blessing for the One Who blesses you loves all the world, and leaves 
nothing within the world that COULD be feared . 
880 But if you 
SHRINK from blessing, will the world indeed seem fearful, for you 
have WITHHELD its peace and comfort, leaving it to die. 
Would not 
a world so bitterly bereft be looked on as a condemnation by the one 
who COULD have saved it, but stepped back, because he was 
AFRAID of being healed? The eyes of all the dying bring reproach, 
and suffering whispers, "What is there to fear?" 

T 27 F 5. 
Consider well its question. 
It is asked of you on YOUR be¬ 
half. 
A dying world asks only that you rest an instant from attack 
upon YOURSELF, that it be healed. 
Come to the holy instant and be 
healed, for nothing that is there received is left behind, on your re¬ 
turning to the world. 
And BEING blessed, you will bring blessing. 

Life is given you, to give the dying world. 
And suffering eyes no 
longer will accuse, but shine in thanks to you who blessing gave. 


The holy instant's radiance will light YOUR eyes, and give them 
sight to see beyond ALL suffering, and see Christ's Face INSTEAD. 

Healing REPLACES suffering. 
Who looks on one cannot PERCEIVE 
the other, for they CANNOT both be there. 
And what YOU see the 
world will witness, and will witness TO. 


T 27 F 6. 
Thus is YOUR healing everything the world requires, that it 
may be healed. 
It needs ONE lesson that has perfectly been learned. 



880 John 6:20 But He said to them, “It is I; do not be afraid.” 


873 


1-863 



Volume I Text 


And then, when YOU forget it, will the world remind you gently of 
what you have taught. 
No reinforcement will its thanks withhold 
from you who let yourselves be healed, that it might live. 
It will call 
forth its witnesses to show the Face of Christ to you who brought 
the sight to THEM, by which THEY witnessed it. 
The world of accu¬ 
sation is replaced by one in which all eyes look lovingly upon the 
T(952) -778 friend who brought them their release. 
And happily your 
brother will perceive the many friends he thought were enemies. 


T 27 F 7. 
Problems are not specific, but they take specific forms, and 
these specific shapes make up the world. 
And no-one understands 
the nature of his problem. 
If he DID, it would be there no more for 
him to see. 
Its very NATURE is that it is NOT. 
And thus, WHILE he 
perceives it, he can NOT perceive it as it is. 
But HEALING is appar¬ 
ent in specific instances, and generalizes to include them all. 
This is 
because they really ARE the same, DESPITE their different forms. 

All learning aims at transfer, which becomes complete within two 
situations which are seen as one. 
For ONLY common elements are 
there. 
But this can only be attained by One Who does not see the 
DIFFERENCES you see. 


T 27 F 8. 
The total transfer of your learning is NOT made by you. 
But 
that it HAS been made, IN SPITE of all the differences you see, con¬ 
vinces YOU that they could not be real. 
Your healing WILL extend, 
and WILL be brought to problems that you thought were NOT your 
own. 
And it will ALSO be apparent that your many DIFFERENT 
problems will be solved, as any ONE of them has been escaped. 
It 
CANNOT be their differences which made this possible, for learn¬ 
ing does not jump from situations to their opposites, and bring the 
SAME effects. 
All healing MUST proceed in lawful manner, in ac¬ 
cord with laws that have been properly perceived, but NEVER vio¬ 
lated. 
Fear you not the way that YOU perceive them. 
You ARE 
wrong, but there is One within you Who is RIGHT. 


T 27 F 9. 
Leave, then, the transfer of your learning to the One Who 
REALLY understands its laws, and Who will GUARANTEE that 
they remain unviolated and unlimited. 
Your part is merely to apply 


1-864 


874 


Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


what He has taught you TO YOURSELF, and He will do the rest. 

And thus the power of your learning will be PROVED to you, by all 
the many DIFFERENT witnesses it finds. 
Your brother FIRST among 
them will be seen, but thousands stand behind him, and beyond 
each one of them there are a thousand more. 
Each one may SEEM to 
have a problem which is DIFFERENT T(953) -779 from the rest. 
Yet 
they are solved TOGETHER. 
And their common Answer shows the 
QUESTIONS could not have been separate. 


T 27 F to. 
Peace be to you whom is healing offered . 
881 And you will 
learn that peace is given you, when you accept the healing for your¬ 
self. 
Its TOTAL value need not be appraised by YOU, to let you un¬ 
derstand that you have benefited from it. 
What occurred within the 
instant which love entered in WITHOUT attack, will stay with you 
forever. 
YOUR healing will be ONE of its effects, as will your 
brother's. 
Everywhere you go, will you behold its multiplied effects. 

Yet all the witnesses that you behold will be FAR less than all there 
really ARE. 
Infinity cannot be understood by merely counting up 
the separate parts. 
God thanks you for your healing, for He knows it 
is a gift of love unto His Son, and therefore is it given unto Him. 

T(954) -780 882 

T 27 G. 
The Purpose of Pain (Notes 1909 12:44) 

T 27 G l. 
Pain demonstrates the body must be real. 
It is a loud, ob¬ 
scuring voice, whose shrieks would silence what the Holy Spirit 
says, and keep His words from your awareness. 
Pain compels atten¬ 
tion, drawing it away from Him, and focusing upon itself. 
Its pur¬ 
pose is the same as pleasure, for they both are means TO MAKE 
THE BODY REAL. 
What shares a common function IS the same. 


This is the law of purpose, which unites all those who share in it 
within itself. 
Pleasure and pain are EQUALLY unreal, because their 
purpose CANNOT be achieved. 
Thus are they means for nothing. 



SSI John 20:26 And after eight days His disciples were again inside, and Thomas with them. 
Jesus 
came, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, “Peace to you!” 

882 Feb. 
4, 1968 


875 


1-865 



Volume I Text 


for they have a goal without a meaning. 
And they share the lack of 
meaning that their PURPOSE has. 


T 27 G 2. 
Sin shifts from pain to pleasure, and again to pain. 
For EI¬ 
THER witness is the same, and carries but one message, "You are 
here, WITHIN this body, and you CAN be hurt. 
You can have 
pleasure, too, but ONLY at the cost of pain." These witnesses are 
joined by many more. 
Each one SEEMS different, because it has a 
different NAME, and so it seems to answer to a different SOUND. 

Except for this, the witnesses of sin are all alike. 
Call pleasure 
"pain," and it will hurt. 
Call pain pleasure, and the pain BEHIND 
the pleasure will be felt no more. 
Sin's witnesses but shift from 
name to name, as one steps forward, and another, back. 
Yet which is 
foremost makes NO difference. 
Sin's witnesses hear but the call of 
death . 
883 

T 27 G 3. 
This body, purposeless within itself, holds all your memo¬ 
ries and all your hopes. 
You use its eyes to see, its ears to hear, and 
let it TELL you what it is it feels. 
IT DOES NOT KNOW. 
It tells you 
but the NAMES you gave it to use, when YOU call forth the T(955) - 
781 witnesses to its reality. 
You cannot choose AMONG them which 
are real, for any one you choose is like the rest. 
This name or that, 
but nothing more, you choose. 
You do not MAKE a witness true, 
because you called him by truth's NAME. 
The truth is found in him 
IF IT IS TRUTH HE REPRESENTS . 
884 And otherwise he lies, if you 
should call him by the Holy Name of God Himself. 


T 27 G 4. 
God's Witness sees no witnesses AGAINST the body. 
Nei¬ 
ther does He harken to the witnesses by OTHER names, which 
speak in OTHER ways for its reality. 
He KNOWS it is not real. 
For 
NOTHING could contain what you believe it holds within. 
Nor 
COULD it tell a Part of God Himself what It should feel, and what 


3 Romans 6:23 For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our 
Lord. 


884 John 18:37 Pilate therefore said to Him, “Are You a king then?” 

Jesus answered, “You say rightly that I am a king. 
For this cause I was bom, and for this cause I have 
come into the world, that I should bear witness to the tmth. 
Everyone who is of the tmth hears My 
voice.” 


1-866 


876 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


Its Function is. 
Yet must He love whatever YOU hold dear. 
And for 
each witness to the body's death. 
He sends a witness to your Life in 
Him Who knows no death. 
Each miracle He brings is witness that 
the body is NOT real. 
Its pains and pleasures does He heal alike, for 
ALL sin's witnesses do His replace. 


T 27 G 5. 
The miracle makes NO distinctions in the names by which 
sin's witnesses are called. 
It merely proves that what they REPRE¬ 
SENT has no effects. 
And this it proves BECAUSE its own effects 
have come to take their place. 
It matters not the name by which you 
called your suffering. 
IT IS NO LONGER THERE. 
The One Who 
brings the miracle perceived them all as one, and called by name of 
"fear." As fear is witness unto death, so is the miracle the witness 
unto Life. 
It is a witness no-one can deny, for it is the EFFECTS of 
life it brings. 
The dying live, the dead arise, and pain has van¬ 
ished . 
885 Yet a miracle speaks not but for itself, but what it REPRE¬ 
SENTS. 
Love, too, has symbols in a world of sin. 
The miracle for¬ 
gives BECAUSE T(956) -782 it stands for what is PAST forgiveness, 
and is TRUE. 


T 27 G 6. 
How foolish and insane it is to think a miracle is BOUND by 
laws which it came solely to UNDO. 
The laws of SIN have different 
witnesses, with different strengths. 
And THEY attest to different 
suffering. 
Yet to the One Who sends forth miracles to bless the 


885 Ezekiel 37:3-6 And he said unto me. 
Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, 0 Lord 
GOD, thou knowest. 
Again he said unto me, Prophesy over these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry 
bones, hear the word of the LORD. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these bones: Behold, I will cause 
breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. 
And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon 
you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that I am the 
LORD. 


Isaiah 26:19 Your dead shall live; Together with my dead body they shall arise. 
Awake and sing, you 
who dwell in dust; For your dew is like the dew of herbs, And the earth shall cast out the dead. 


Isaiah 35:5-6 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, And the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. 

Then the lame shall leap like a deer, 

And the tongue of the dumb sing. 
For waters shall burst forth in the wilderness, And streams in the 
desert. 


Matthew 10:1 And when He had called His twelve disciples to Him, He gave them power over unclean 
spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all kinds of sickness and all kinds of disease. 


Matthew 10:8 “Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out demons. 
Freely you have 
received, freely give.” 

Matthew 11:5 “The blind see and the lame walk; the lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear; the dead are 
raised up and the poor have the gospel preached to them.” 


877 


1-867 



Volume I Text 


world, a tiny stab of pain, a little worldly pleasure, and the throes of 
death itself are but a single sound; a call for healing, and a plaintive 
cry for help within a world of misery. 
It is their SAMENESS that the 
miracle attests. 
It is their SAMENESS that it PROVES. 
The laws 
which call them DIFFERENT are dissolved, and SHOWN as power¬ 
less. 
The PURPOSE of a miracle is to accomplish this. 
And God 
Himself has GUARANTEED the strength of miracles for what they 
witness TO. 


T 27 G 7. 
Be witnesses unto the miracle, and NOT the laws of sin. 

There is no NEED to suffer any more. 
But there IS need that you be 
healed, because the suffering of the world has made it deaf to its 
salvation and deliverance. 
The resurrection of the world awaits 
YOUR healing and YOUR happiness, that you may DEMON¬ 
STRATE the healing of the world. 
The holy instant will replace ALL 
sin, if you but carry its effects with you. 
And no-one will ELECT to 
suffer more. 
What better function COULD you serve than this? Be 
healed that you may heal, and suffer not the laws of sin to be ap¬ 
plied to YOU. 
And Truth WILL be revealed to you who chose to let 
Love's symbols TAKE THE PLACE of sin. 
T(957) -783 886 

T 27 H. 
The Illusion of Suffering (Notes 1914 12:49) 

T 27 H 1. 
Suffering is an emphasis upon all that the world has done to 
injure YOU. 
Here is the world's demented version of salvation 
clearly shown. 
Like to a dream of punishment, in which the dreamer 
is unconscious of what brought on the attack against himself, he 
sees himself attacked unjustly, and by something NOT himself. 
HE 
is the victim of this "something else," a thing OUTSIDE himself for 
which he has no reason to be held responsible. 
He must be innocent 
BECAUSE he knows not what HE does, but what is done TO him. 

Yet is his own attack upon himself apparent still, for it is he who 
bears the suffering. 
And he can NOT escape BECAUSE its source is 
seen outside himself. 



886 February 9, 1968 


1-868 


878 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


T 27 H 2. 
Now you are being shown you CAN escape. 
All that is 
needed is you look upon the problem as it IS, and NOT the way that 
you have set it up. 
How COULD there be another way to solve a 
problem which is VERY simple, but has been obscured by heavy 
clouds of complication, which were MADE to keep the problem un¬ 
resolved? WITHOUT the clouds, the problem will emerge in all its 
primitive simplicity. 
The choice will NOT be difficult, because the 
problem is absurd when clearly seen. 
No-one has difficulty making 
up his mind to let a simple problem be resolved, if it is SEEN as 
hurting him, and also very easily removed. 


T 27 H 3. 
The "reasoning" by which the world is made, on which it 
rests, by which it is maintained, is simply this: "YOU are the cause 
of what I do. 
Your presence JUSTIFIES my wrath, and you exist and 
think APART from me. 
While YOU attack, I MUST be innocent. 
And 
what I suffer from IS your attack." No-one who looks upon this 
"reasoning" EXACTLY as it is could fail to see it does NOT follow, 
and it makes NO sense. 
Yet it SEEMS sensible, because it LOOKS as 
if the world WERE hurting you. 
And so it seems as if there is no 
NEED to go beyond the obvious in terms of cause. 
T(958) -784 

T 27 H 4. 
There is INDEED a need. 
The world's ESCAPE from con¬ 
demnation is a need which those WITHIN the world are joined in 
sharing. 
Yet they do not recognize their common need. 
For each one 
thinks that, if he does his part, the condemnation of the world will 
rest on him. 
And it is this that he perceives to BE his part in its de¬ 
liverance. 
Vengeance must have a focus. 
Otherwise, is the avenger's 
knife in his own hand, and pointed to himself. 
And he MUST see it 
in ANOTHER hand, if he would be a victim of attack he did NOT 
choose. 
And thus he suffers from the wounds a knife he does NOT 
hold has made upon himself. 


T 27 H 5. 
This is the PURPOSE of the world he sees. 
And, LOOKED 
AT thus, the world provides the means by which this purpose 
SEEMS to be fulfilled. 
The means ATTEST the purpose, but are NOT 
themselves a cause. 
Nor will the CAUSE be changed by seeing it 
APART from its effects. 
The cause PRODUCES the effects, which 


879 


1-869 


Volume I Text 


then bear witness to the CAUSE, and NOT themselves. 
Look, then, 
BEYOND effects. 
It is NOT here the CAUSE of suffering and sin 
must lie. 
And dwell not on the suffering and sin, for they are but 
REFLECTIONS of their cause. 
The part you play in SALVAGING 
the world from condemnation IS your own escape. 


T 27 H 6. 
Forget not that the witness to the world of evil cannot speak 
EXCEPT for what has seen a NEED for evil in the world. 
And this is 
where YOUR guilt was first beheld. 
In separation from your brother 
was the first attack upon yourself begun. 
And it is THIS the world 
bears witness to. 
Seek not another cause, nor look among the mighty 
legions of its witnesses for its undoing. 
They SUPPORT its claim on 
your allegiance. 
What CONCEALS the truth is not where you 
should look to FIND the truth. 
The witnesses to sin all stand within 
ONE little space. 
And it is HERE you find the CAUSE of your per¬ 
spective on the world. 
T(959) - 785 - 887 

T 27 H 7. 
Once you were unaware of what the cause of everything the 
world appeared to thrust upon you, uninvited and unasked, must 
REALLY be. 
Of one thing you were sure; of all the many causes you 
perceived as bringing pain and suffering to you, your guilt was 
NOT among them. 
Nor did you, in ANY way, REQUEST them for 
yourself. 
This is how ALL illusions come about. 
The one who makes 
them does NOT see himself as making them, and their reality does 
NOT depend on him. 
Whatever cause they have is something quite 
APART from him, and what he sees is SEPARATE from his mind. 


T 27 H 8. 
He CANNOT doubt his dreams' reality BECAUSE he does 
not see the part he plays in MAKING them, and MAKING them 
seem real. 
No-one can waken from a dream the world is dreaming 
FOR him. 
He becomes a part of someone ELSE's dream. 
He CAN¬ 
NOT choose to waken from a dream he did not make. 
Helpless he 
stands, a victim to a dream conceived and cherished by a SEPA¬ 
RATE mind. 
Careless indeed of him this mind must be, as thought¬ 
less of his peace and happiness as is the weather, or the time of day. 



887 February 12, 1968. 



1-870 


880 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


It loves him not, but casts him as it will, in any role that satisfies its 
dream. 


T 27 H 9. 
So little is his worth that he is but a dancing shadow, leaping 
up and down, according to a senseless plot conceived within the 
idle dreaming of the world. 
This is the ONLY picture you can see, 
the ONE alternative that you can choose, the OTHER possibility of 
cause, if you be NOT the dreamer of your dreams. 
And this IS what 
you choose, if you deny the cause of suffering is in YOUR mind. 
Be 
glad indeed it is, for thus are YOU the ONE decider of your destiny 
in time. 
The choice IS yours to make between a sleeping death and 
dreams of evil, or a happy wakening and joy of life. 
T(960) -786 

T 27 H to. 
What COULD you choose between, but life or death, wak¬ 
ing or sleeping, war or peace, your dream or your reality? But if the 
choice is REALLY given you, then you must see the causes of the 
things you choose BETWEEN exactly AS they are and WHERE they 
are. 
What choices can be made between two states, but ONE of 
which is clearly recognized? Who could be free to choose BETWEEN 
effects, when only ONE is seen as up to you? An honest choice 
could NEVER be perceived as one in which the choice is split be¬ 
tween a tiny you and an enormous world, with DIFFERENT dreams 
about the truth in you. 


T 27 H ll. 
The gap between reality and dreams lies not between the 
dreaming of the world and what you dream in secret. 
THEY are 
one. 
The dreaming of the world is but a part of your own dream you 
gave away, and saw as if it were its start and ending, both. 
Yet was 
it started by your SECRET dream, which you do NOT perceive, al¬ 
though it CAUSED the part you see and do not doubt is real. 
How 
COULD you doubt it, while you lie asleep, and dream in secret that 
its CAUSE is real? A brother SEPARATED from yourself, an ancient 
enemy, a murderer who stalks you in the night and plots your 
death, yet plans that it be lingering and slow, - 888 


888 This is a very curious paragraph break in the Urtext manuscript. 
The Notes has no paragraph break 
here, just an em dash. 
The HLC and FIP simply use a semicolon, which seems more appropriate. 



881 


1-871 



Volume I Text 


T 27 H 12. 
Of this you dream. 
And, UNDERNEATH this dream, is yet 
another, in which YOU become the murderer, the secret enemy, the 
scavenger and the destroyer of the brother and the world you fear 
alike. 
Here is the CAUSE of suffering, the space BETWEEN your 
dreams and your reality. 
The little gap you do not even see, the 
birthplace of illusions and of fear, the time of terror and of ancient 
hate, the instant of disaster; — all are here. 
Here is the CAUSE of un¬ 
reality. 
And it is here that it will be undone. 
YOU are the dreamer of 
the world of dreams. 
No OTHER cause it has, nor ever will. 
T(96l) - 
787 

T 27 H 13. 
Nothing more fearful than an idle dream has terrified 
God's Son, and made him think that he has lost his innocence, de¬ 
nied his Father, and made war upon himself. 
So fearful is the dream, 
so seeming real, he could not waken to reality without the sweat of 
terror and a scream of mortal fear, unless a gentler dream preceded 
his awaking, and allowed his calmer mind to welcome, NOT to fear, 
the Voice that called with love to waken him. 
A gentler dream, in 
which his suffering was healed, and where his brother was his 
friend. 
God willed he waken gently, and with joy. 
And GAVE him 
means to waken WITHOUT fear. 
Accept the dream He gave, IN¬ 
STEAD of yours. 
It is NOT difficult to shift a dream, when once the 
dreamer has been recognized. 


T 27 H 14. 
Rest in the Holy Spirit, and allow His gentle dreams to take 
the place of those you dreamed in terror, and in fear of death. 
He 
brings FORGIVING dreams, in which the choice is NOT who is the 
murderer, and who shall be the victim. 
In the dreams HE brings, 
there IS no murder, and there IS no death . 
889 The dream of guilt is 
fading from your sight, although your eyes are closed. 
A smile has 
come to lighten up your sleeping face. 
The sleep is peaceful now, for 
these are happy dreams. 
Dream softly of your sinless brother, who 


889 2 Timothy 1:10 But has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel, 

Revelation 21:4 And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes; there shall be no more death, nor 
sorrow, nor crying. 
There shall be no more pain, for the former things have passed away.” 


1-872 


882 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


unites with you in holy innocence. 
And, from THIS dream, the Lord 
of Heaven will Himself awaken His beloved Son. 


T 27 H15. 
Dream of your brother's kindnesses INSTEAD of dwelling 
in your dreams on his mistakes. 
Select his thoughtfulness to dream 
about, INSTEAD of counting up the hurts he gave. 
Forgive him his 
illusions, and give thanks to him for all the helpfulness he gave. 


And do not brush aside his many gifts, because he is not perfect in 
your dreams. 
He represents his Father, Whom you see as offering 
both life AND death to you. 
Brother, He gives BUT life, and what 
you see as gifts your brother offers REPRESENT the gifts you dream 
your Father gives to you. 
Let all your brother's gifts be seen in light 
of charity and kindness offered you. 
And let no pain disturb your 
dream of deep appreciation for his gifts to you. 
T(962) -788 890 

T 27 I. 
The "Hero" of the Dream (Notes 1925 12:60) 

T 27 11 . 
The body is the central figure in the dreaming of the world. 

There IS no dream without it, nor does it exist without the dream, in 
which it acts as if it were a person, to be seen and be believed. 
It 
takes the central place in every dream, which tells the story of how it 
was made by OTHER bodies, born into the world OUTSIDE the 
body, lives a little while, and dies, to be united in the dust with 
other bodies, dying like itself. 
In the brief time allotted it to live, it 
seeks for other bodies as its friends and enemies. 
Its safety is its 
main concern. 
Its comfort is its guiding rule. 
It tries to look for 
pleasure, and avoid the things that would be hurtful. 
Above all, it 
tries to teach itself its pains and joys are different, and CAN be told 
apart. 


T 27 1 2 . 
The dreaming of the world takes many forms, because the 
body seeks in many ways to PROVE it is autonomous and real. 
It 
puts things on itself that it has bought with little metal discs or pa¬ 
per strips the world proclaims as valuable and good. 
It works to get 
them, doing senseless things, and tosses them away for senseless 
things it does not NEED, and does not even WANT. 
It hires OTHER 

890 February 14, 1968. 



883 


1-873 



Volume I Text 


bodies, that they may protect it, and collect more senseless things 
that it can call its own. 
It looks about for special bodies which can 
SHARE its dream. 
Sometimes it dreams it is a conqueror of bodies 
weaker than itself. 
But in some phases of the dream, it is the slave of 
bodies which would hurt and torture it. 


T 27 13. 
The body's serial adventures, from the time of birth to dying 
is the theme of every dream the world has ever had. 
The "hero" of 
this dream will never change, nor will its purpose. 
Though the 
dream itself takes many forms, and SEEMS to show a great variety 
of places and events wherein its "hero" finds itself, the dream has 
but ONE purpose, taught in many ways. 
This single lesson does it 
try to teach again, and still again, and yet once more; - that it is 
CAUSE and NOT effect. 
And YOU are ITS effect, and CANNOT be 
its cause. 
Thus are you NOT the dreamer, but the DREAM. 
And so 
you wander idly in and out of places and events that IT contrives. 


T 27 14. 
That this is all the BODY does, is true. 
For it IS but a figure in 
a dream. 
But who REACTS to figures in a dream, UNLESS he sees 
them as if they were real? T(963) -789 

The INSTANT that he sees them as they ARE, they HAVE no more 
effects on him BECAUSE he understands he GAVE them their ef¬ 
fects BY CAUSING THEM, and MAKING them seem real. 
How 
willing are you to ESCAPE effects of all the dreams the world has 
ever had? Is it your wish to let NO dream appear to be the cause of 
what it is YOU do? Then let us merely look upon the dream's be¬ 
ginning, for the part you see is but the SECOND part, whose 
CAUSE lies in the first. 


T 27 I 5. 
No-one asleep and dreaming in the world remembers his at¬ 
tack upon himself. 
No-one believes there really was a time when he 
knew nothing of a body, and could never have conceived this world 
as real. 
He would have seen at once that these ideas are one illusion, 
too ridiculous for anything but to be laughed away. 
How serious 
they now appear to be! And no-one can remember when they would 
have met with laughter and with disbelief. 
We CAN remember this, 
if we but look directly at their CAUSE. 
And we will see the grounds 


1-874 


884 


Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


for laughter, NOT a cause for fear. 
Let us return the dream he gave 
away unto the dreamer, who perceives the dream as SEPARATE 
from himself, and done to him. 


T 27 1 6 . 
Into eternity, where all is one, there crept a tiny, mad idea, at 
which the Son of God remembered not to laugh. 
In his forgetting 
did the thought become a serious idea, and possible of both accom¬ 
plishment and real effects. 
Together, we can laugh them BOTH 
away, and understand that time can NOT intrude upon eternity. 
It 
IS a joke to think that time can come to circumvent eternity, which 
MEANS there is no time. 
A timelessness in which is time made real; 
a Part of God Which can attack Itself; a separate brother as an en¬ 
emy; a mind WITHIN a body; all are forms of circularity, whose 
ending starts at its beginning, ending at its cause. 


T 27 I 7. 
The world you see depicts EXACTLY what you thought 
YOU did. 
Except that NOW you think that what you did is being 
done to YOU. 
The guilt for what YOU thought is being placed 
OUTSIDE yourself, and on a guilty world which dreams your 
dreams, and thinks your thoughts INSTEAD of you. 
It brings ITS 
vengeance, not your own. 
IT keeps you narrowly confined within a 
body, which it punishes because of all the sinful things the body 
does within ITS dream. 
You have NO power to make the body stop 
its evil deeds, because you did NOT make it, and can NOT T(964) -790 
control its actions, or its purpose, or its fate. 


T 27 1 8 . 
The world but demonstrates an ancient truth; - 891 you WILL 
believe that others do to you EXACTLY what you think you did to 
them . 
892 But, once deluded into blaming THEM, you will not see the 
CAUSE of what they do BECAUSE you want the guilt to rest on 
them. 
How childish is this petulant device to keep your innocence 
by pushing guilt OUTSIDE yourself, but NEVER letting go! It is not 
easy to perceive the jest, when all around you do your eyes behold 
its heavy consequences, but WITHOUT their trifling cause. 
Without 


8,1 The Urtext manuscript has a hyphen here, the Notes doesn’t. 


892 Matthew 7:12 “Therefore, whatever you want men to do to you, do also to them, for this is the Law 
and the Prophets.” 


885 


1-875 



Volume I Text 


the cause do its effects seem serious and sad indeed. 
Yet they but 
follow. 
And it is their CAUSE which follows nothing, and is but a 
jest. 


T 27 19. 
In gentle laughter does the Holy Spirit perceive the cause, 
and looks NOT to effects. 
How else could He correct YOUR error, 
who have OVERLOOKED the cause entirely? He bids you bring 
each terrible effect to Him, that you may look TOGETHER on its 
foolish cause, and laugh with Him a while. 
YOU judge effects, but 
HE has judged their CAUSE. 
And by His judgment are effects re¬ 
moved. 
Perhaps you come in tears, but hear Him say, "My brother. 

Holy Son of God, behold your idle dream, in which this could oc¬ 
cur," and you will leave the holy instant with your laughter and 
your brother's JOINED with His. 
T(965) -791 893 

T 27 110. 
The secret of salvation is but this: That YOU are doing this 
UNTO YOURSELF. 
No matter what the form of the attack, this 
STILL is true. 
Whoever takes the role of enemy and of attacker, 
STILL is this the truth. 
Whatever seems to be the cause of any pain 
and suffering you feel, this is STILL true. 
For you would not react at 
all to figures in a dream you knew that YOU were dreaming. 
Let 
them be as hateful and as vicious as they may, they COULD have no 
effect on you, unless you failed to recognize it is YOUR dream. 
This 
single lesson learned will set you free from suffering, WHATEVER 
form it takes. 


T 27 111. 
The Holy Spirit will repeat this ONE inclusive lesson of de¬ 
liverance, until it has been learned, REGARDLESS of the form of 
suffering that brings you pain. 
Whatever hurt you bring to Him, He 
will make answer with this very simple truth. 
For this one answer 
TAKES AWAY the cause of every form of sorrow and of pain. 
The 
form affects His answer not at all, for He would teach you but the 
SINGLE cause of all of them, no matter WHAT their form. 
And you 
will understand that miracles reflect the simple statement, "I have 
done this thing, and it is this I would undo." 


893 February 15, 1968 


1-876 


886 



Chapter 27 - The Body and the Dream 


T 27 112. 
Bring, then, all forms of suffering to Him Who knows that 
every one is like the rest. 
He sees NO differences where none exist, 
and He will teach you how each one is CAUSED. 
None has a DIF¬ 
FERENT cause from all the rest, and ALL of them are easily undone 
by but a SINGLE lesson truly learned. 
Salvation is a secret you have 
kept but from yourself. 
The universe proclaims it so. 
But, to its wit¬ 
nesses, you pay no heed at all. 
For they attest the thing you do not 
WANT to know. 
They seem to keep it secret FROM you. 
Yet you 
need but learn you choose but NOT to listen, NOT to see. 


T 27 113. 
How differently will you perceive the world, when this is 
recognized! When you forgive the world YOUR guilt, YOU will be 
free of it. 
Its innocence does NOT demand your guilt, nor does 
YOUR guiltlessness rest on ITS sins. 
This is the obvious, a secret 
kept from no-one but yourself. 
And it is this that has T(966) -792 main¬ 
tained you SEPARATE from the world, and kept your brother 
SEPARATE from you. 
Now need you but to learn that BOTH of you 
are innocent OR guilty. 
The one thing that is impossible is that you 
be UNLIKE each other; that they BOTH be true. 
This is the only se¬ 
cret yet to learn. 
And it will be NO secret you are healed. 
T(967) -793 894 


894 February 19, 1968 


887 


1-877 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 

T 28 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1936 12:71) 

T 28 A l. 
THE MIRACLE DOES NOTHING. 
All it does is to UNdo. 

And thus it cancels out the interference to what HAS BEEN done. 
It 
does not add, but merely takes away. 
And what it takes away is 
long since gone, but, being kept in memory, APPEARS to have im¬ 
mediate effects. 
This world was over long ago. 
The thoughts that 
made it are no longer in the mind that thought of them, and loved 
them for a while. 
The miracle but shows the past is gone, and what 
has truly gone HAS no effects. 
REMEMBERING a cause can but 
produce ILLUSIONS of its presence, NOT effects. 


T 28 A 2. 
All the effects of guilt are here no more. 
For guilt is over. 
In 
its passing went its consequences, left without a cause. 
Why would 
you cling to it in memory, if you did not DESIRE its effects? Re¬ 
membering is as selective as perception, being its past tense. 
It is 
perception of the past, as if it were occurring NOW, and still were 
there to see. 
Memory, like perception, is a skill made up by you, to 
take the place of what God GAVE in your creation. 
And, like all the 
things you made, it can be used to serve ANOTHER purpose, and to 
be means for something ELSE. 
It can be used to heal, and NOT to 
hurt, if you so wish. 


T 28 A 3. 
Nothing employed for healing represents an effort to do 
anything at all. 
It is a recognition that you HAVE no needs which 
mean that something must be DONE. 
It is an unselective memory, 
which is NOT used to INTERFERE with truth. 
All things the Holy 
Spirit can employ for healing have been given Him WITHOUT the 
content and the purposes for which they have been made. 
They are 
but skills WITHOUT an application. 
They AWAIT their use. 
They 
have NO dedication and NO aim . 
895 


895 793 [split paragraph] 


1-878 


888 



Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


T 28 B. 
The Present Memory (Notes 193712:72) 

T 28 B l. 
The Holy Spirit can indeed make use of memory, for God 
Himself is there. 
But this is NOT a memory of past events, but 
ONLY of a PRESENT state. 
T(968) -794 

T 28 B 2. 
You are so long accustomed to believe that memory holds 
only what is past, that it is hard for you to realize it is a skill that 
CAN remember NOW. 
The limitations on remembering the world 
imposes on it are as vast as those you let the world impose on YOU. 

There IS no link of memory to the past. 
If YOU would have it there, 
then there it IS. 
But ONLY your desire made the link, and ONLY 
you have held it to a part of time where guilt appears to linger still. 

The Holy Spirit's use of memory is quite APART from time. 
He does 
NOT seek to use it as a means to KEEP the past, but rather as a way 
TO LET IT GO. 


T 28 B 3. 
Memory holds a message it receives, and does what it is 
GIVEN it to do. 
It does NOT write the message, nor appoint what it 
is FOR. 
Like to the body, it is purposeless within itself. 
And if it 
seems to serve to cherish ancient hate, and offer you the pictures of 
injustices and hurts that you were saving, this is what you asked its 
message BE, and this is what it IS. 
Committed to its vaults, the his¬ 
tory of all the body's past is hidden there. 
All of the strange associa¬ 
tions made to keep the past alive, the present dead, are stored 
within it, waiting your command that they be brought to you, and 
lived again. 
And thus do their effects appear to be INCREASED by 
time, which TOOK AWAY their cause. 


T 28 B 4. 
Yet time is but another phase of what DOES NOTHING. 
It 
works hand in hand with all the other attributes with which you 
sought to keep concealed the truth about yourself. 
Time neither 
takes away, nor can restore. 
And yet you make strange use of it, as if 
the past had CAUSED the present, which is but a CONSEQUENCE, 
in which no change can be made possible, because its cause has 
GONE. 
And change must have a cause that will endure, or else it 
will not last. 
No change can be made in the present, if its cause is 


889 


1-879 


Volume I Text 


PAST. 
ONLY the past is held in memory, as you make use of it, and 
so it is a way to hold the past AGAINST the now. 
T(969) -795 
T 28 B 5. 
Remember NOTHING that you taught yourself, for you 
were badly taught. 
Who would keep a senseless lesson in his mind, 
when he can learn and can preserve a BETTER one? When ancient 
memories of hate appear, remember that their cause is gone. 
And so 
you CANNOT understand what they are FOR. 
Let not the cause 
that you would give them NOW be what it was that made them 
what they were, or seemed to be. 
Be GLAD that it is gone, for this is 
what you would be pardoned FROM. 
And see, instead, the NEW 
effects of cause accepted NOW, with consequences HERE. 


T 28 B 6. 
They will surprise you with their loveliness. 
The ancient 
NEW ideas they bring will be the happy consequences of a cause 896 
so ancient that it FAR exceeds the span of memory that your percep¬ 
tion sees. 
This is the Cause the Holy Spirit has remembered FOR 
you, when you would forget. 
It is NOT past, because He let it not be 
unremembered. 
It has never changed, because there never was a 
time in which He did not keep it safely in your mind. 
Its conse¬ 
quences will indeed SEEM new, because you thought that you re¬ 
membered not their Cause. 
Yet, was It NEVER absent from your 
mind, for it was NOT your Father's Will that He be unremembered 
by His only Son. 


T 28 B 7. 
What YOU remember never WAS. 
It came from causeless¬ 
ness which you CONFUSED with cause. 
It CAN deserve but laugh¬ 
ter, when you learn you have remembered consequences which 
were causeless, and could never BE effects. 
The miracle reminds you 
of a Cause forever present, perfectly untouched by time and inter¬ 
ference. 
NEVER changed from what It IS. 
And YOU are Its effects, 
as changeless and as perfect as Itself. 
Its memory does NOT lie in 
the past, nor waits the 897 future. 
It is NOT revealed in miracles. 
They 


m ' The word “Cause” and the pronoun “It" referring to it should probably both be capitalized 
consistently. 
As you see, in the Urtext manuscript the capitalization is not consistent. 
It is not 
consistent in the Notes either. 


897 While the Urtext clearly has definite article “the” here, the Notes equally clearly has the indefinite 
article “a.” 


1-880 


890 



Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


but remind you that It has not gone. 
When you forgive It for YOUR 
sins. 
It will no longer BE denied. 
T(970) -796 

T 28 B 8. 
You who have sought to lay a judgment on your own Crea¬ 
tor, cannot understand it is NOT He Who laid a judgment on His 
Son. 
You would DENY Him His effects, yet have they never BEEN 
denied. 
There WAS no time in which His Son could be condemned 
for what was causeless, and AGAINST His Will. 
What YOUR re¬ 
membering would witness to, is but the fear of God. 
He has not 
DONE the thing you fear. 
No more have YOU. 
And so your inno¬ 
cence has NOT been lost. 
You need NO healing to be healed. 
In qui¬ 
etness, see in the miracle a lesson in allowing Cause to have Its 
OWN effects, and doing NOTHING that would interfere. 


T 28 B 9. 
The miracle comes quietly into the mind that stops an in¬ 
stant, and is still. 
It reaches gently from that quiet time, and from the 
mind it healed in quiet then, to other minds to SHARE its quietness. 

And they will JOIN in doing nothing to prevent its radiant extension 
back into the Mind that caused ALL minds to be. 
Born out of shar¬ 
ing, there can BE no pause in time to cause the miracle delay in has¬ 
tening to all unquiet minds, and bringing them an instant's stillness, 
when the memory of God returns to them. 
Their OWN remember¬ 
ing is quiet now, and what has come to take its place will not be 
wholly unremembered afterwards. 


T 28 B 10. 
He to Whom time is given offers thanks for every quiet in¬ 
stant given Him. 
For in that instant is His memory allowed to offer 
all its treasures to the Son of God, for whom they have been kept. 

How gladly does He offer them unto the one for whom He has been 
given them! And His Creator SHARES His thanks, because He 
would not be deprived of His effects. 
The instant's silence that His 
Son accepts gives welcome to eternity and Him, and lets them enter 
where they would abide. 
For in that instant does the Son of God do 
NOTHING that would make himself afraid. 
T(97l) -797 

T 28 B 11. 
How instantly the memory of God arises in the mind that 
has no fear to keep the memory away. 
Its own remembering has 
gone. 
There IS no past to keep its fearful image in the way of glad 


891 


1-881 


Volume I Text 


awakening to present peace. 
The trumpets of eternity resound 
throughout the stillness, yet disturb it not. 
And what is NOW re¬ 
membered is not fear, but rather is the Cause that fear was made to 
render unremembered and undone. 
The stillness speaks in gentle 
sounds of love the Son of God remembers from BEFORE his own 
remembering came IN BETWEEN the present and the past, to shut 
them out. 


T 28 B 12. 
Now is the Son of God at last aware of PRESENT Cause 
and Its benign effects. 
Now does he understand what he has made is 
causeless, making NO effects at all. 
He HAS done nothing. 
And, in 
seeing THIS, he understands he never had a NEED for doing ANY¬ 
THING, and never did. 
His Cause IS Its effects. 
There never WAS a 
cause besides It, that could generate a DIFFERENT past or future. 

ITS effects are changelessly eternal, BEYOND fear, and PAST the 
world of sin entirely. 
What has been lost to see the causeless NOT? 
And where is sacrifice, when memory of God has come to TAKE 
THE PLACE of loss? 

T 28 B 13. 
What better way to close the little gap between illusions 
and reality than to allow the memory of God to flow ACROSS it, 
making it a bridge an instant will suffice to reach beyond? For God 
has closed it with Himself. 
His memory has NOT gone by, and left a 
stranded Son forever on a shore where he can glimpse ANOTHER 
shore which he can never reach. 
His Father wills that he be lifted up, 
and gently carried over. 
HE has built the bridge, and it is He Who 
will transport His Son across it. 
Have no fear that He will fail in 
what He wills. 
Nor that you be excluded from the Will that IS for 
you. 
T(972) - 798 - 898 

T 28 C. 
Reversing Effect and Cause (Notes 1947 12:82) 

T 28 C l. 
Without a cause there can be no effects, and yet, without ef¬ 
fects, there is no CAUSE. 
The cause a cause is MADE by its effects; 
the Father IS a father by His Son. 
Effects do not CREATE their cause, 
but they ESTABLISH its causation. 
Thus the Son gives fatherhood to 


898 February 26, 1968. 



1-882 


892 



Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


his Creator, and RECEIVES the gift that he has given Him. 
It is BE¬ 
CAUSE he is God's Son that he must ALSO be a father, who creates 
as God created him. 
The circle of creation has no end. 
Its starting 
and its ending are the same. 
But, in itself, it holds the universe of all 
creation, without beginning AND without an end. 


T 28 c 2. 
Fatherhood is creation. 
Love MUST be extended. 
Purity is 
not confined. 
It is the NATURE of the innocent to be forever uncon¬ 
tained, without a barrier or limitation. 
Thus is purity NOT of the 
body. 
Nor can it be FOUND where limitation is. 
The body CAN be 
healed by its EFFECTS, which are as limitless as is itself. 
Yet must all 
healing come about because the mind is recognized as NOT within 
the body, and its innocence is quite APART from it, and where ALL 
healing IS. 
Where, then, is healing? ONLY where its cause is GIVEN 
its effects. 
For sickness is a meaningless attempt to give effects to 
causelessness, and MAKE it be a cause. 


T 28 c 3. 
Always in sickness does the Son of God attempt to make 
himself his cause, and NOT allow himself to be his Father's Son. 
For 
this impossible desire, he does not believe that he is Love's EF¬ 
FECTS, and must be cause BECAUSE of what he is. 
The cause of 
healing is the ONLY Cause of everything. 
It has but ONE effect. 


And, in that recognition, causelessness is GIVEN no effects, and 
none are SEEN. 
A mind within a body, and a world of other bodies, 
each with SEPARATE minds, are your "creations," you the "other" 
mind, creating with effects UNLIKE yourself. 
And, AS their father, 
you must be like them. 


T 28 c 4. 
Nothing at all has happened, but that you have put yourself 
to sleep, and dreamed a dream in which you were an alien to your¬ 
self, and but a part of someone ELSE's dream. 
The miracle does not 
awaken you, but merely shows you T(973) - 799 - who the DREAMER 
is. 
It teaches you there IS a choice of dreams while you are still 
asleep, depending on the PURPOSE of your dreaming. 
Do you wish 
for dreams of healing, or for dreams of death? A dream is like a 
memory, in that it pictures what you WANTED shown to you. 
An 


893 


1-883 



Volume I Text 


empty storehouse, with an open door, holds ALL your shreds of 
memories and dreams. 


T 28 c 5. 
Yet, if you are the DREAMER, you perceive this much at 
least; that YOU have caused the dream, and can accept ANOTHER 
dream as well. 
But, for this change in content of the dream, it MUST 
be realized that it is YOU who dreamed the dreaming that you do 
not like. 
It is but an effect that YOU have caused, and you would not 
BE cause of this effect. 
In dreams of murder and attack are YOU the 
victim, in a dying body slain. 
But, in forgiving dreams, is NO-ONE 
asked to be the victim and the sufferer. 
These are the happy dreams 
the miracle exchanges for your own. 
It does NOT ask you make an¬ 
other. 
ONLY that you see you made the one you would EX¬ 
CHANGE for this. 


T 28 c 6. 
This world is CAUSELESS, as is every dream that anyone 
has dreamed within the world. 
No plans are possible, and no design 
exists that could be found and understood. 
What else could be EX¬ 
PECTED from a thing that has no cause? But, if it HAS no cause, IT 
HAS NO PURPOSE. 
You may cause a dream, but never will you 
give it real EFFECTS. 
For that would change its CAUSE, and it is 
this you CANNOT do. 
The dreamer of a dream is NOT awake, but 
does NOT know he sleeps. 
He sees ILLUSIONS of himself as sick or 
well, depressed or happy, but without a stable cause with GUAR¬ 
ANTEED effects. 


T 28 c 7. 
The miracle establishes you dream a dream, and that its con¬ 
tent is not true. 
This is a crucial step in dealing with illusions. 
No- 
one is AFRAID of them, when he perceives HE MADE THEM UP. 

The fear was held in place BECAUSE he did not see that he was 
AUTHOR of the dream, and not a figure IN the dream. 
He gives 
HIMSELF the consequences that he dreams he gave his brother. 


And it is but this the dream has put together and has offered him, to 
show him that his wishes have been done. 
Thus does he fear his 
OWN attack, but sees it at another's T(974) - 800 - hands. 
As victim, he 
is suffering from its effects, but NOT their cause. 
He authored NOT 
his own attack, and he is innocent of what he caused. 



1-884 


894 


Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


T 28 C 8. 
The miracle does nothing but to show him that HE has done 
nothing. 
What he fears is cause WITHOUT the consequences which 
would MAKE it cause. 
And so it never was. 
The separation started 
with the dream the Father was deprived of His effects, and power¬ 
less to keep them, since He was no longer their Creator. 
In the 
dream, the dreamer made HIMSELF, but what he made had turned 
AGAINST him, taking on the role of its creator, as the dreamer had. 

And, as he hated HIS Creator, so the figures in the dream have 
hated HIM. 
His body is their slave, which they abuse because the 
motives HE has given it have THEY adopted as their own. 
And hate 
it for the vengeance IT would offer THEM. 


T 28 C 9. 
It is THEIR vengeance on the body which appears to prove 
the dreamer COULD not be the maker of the dream. 
Effect and 
cause are first split off, and then REVERSED, so that effect becomes 
a cause; the cause, effect. 
This is the separation's final step, with 
which salvation, which proceeds to go the OTHER way, begins. 
This 
final step is an effect of what has gone before, APPEARING as a 
cause. 
The miracle is the first step in giving BACK to cause the func¬ 
tion of causation, NOT effect. 
For THIS confusion has produced the 
dream, and, while it lasts, will wakening be feared. 
Nor will the Call 
to wakening be heard, because it SEEMS to be the call of fear. 


T 28 C 10. 
Like EVERY lesson that the Holy Spirit requests you learn, 
the miracle is clear. 
It DEMONSTRATES what He would have you 
learn, and SHOWS you its effects are what you WANT. 
In its forgiv¬ 
ing dream, are the EFFECTS of yours undone, and hated enemies 
perceived as friends, with merciful intent. 
Their enmity is seen as 
causeless now, BECAUSE they did not make it. 
And you can accept 
the role of maker of their hate BECAUSE you see that it has no ef¬ 
fects. 
Now are you freed from this much of the dream; the world is 
neutral, and the bodies which still seem to move about as separate 

things NEED NOT BE FEARED. 
And so they are NOT sick. 
T(975) - 
801 - 

T 28 C 11 . 
The miracle returns the CAUSE of fear to you who made it. 

But it ALSO shows that, HAVING no effects, it is NOT cause, be- 


895 


1-885 


Volume I Text 


cause the function of causation is to HAVE effects. 
And where ef¬ 
fects are gone, there IS no cause. 
Thus is the body healed by miracles 
BECAUSE they show the mind MADE sickness, and employed the 
body to be victim, or EFFECT, of what it made. 
But HALF the lesson 
will not teach the whole. 
The miracle is useless, if you learn but that 
the BODY can be healed, for this is NOT the lesson it was sent to 
teach. 
The lesson is the MIND was sick that thought the body 
COULD be sick; projecting OUT its guilt caused NOTHING, and 
had NO effects. 


T 28 C 12. 
This world is full of miracles. 
They stand in shining silence 
next to every dream of pain and suffering, of sin and guilt. 
They are 
the dream's ALTERNATIVE, the choice to be the dreamer, rather 
than deny the active role in making up the dream. 
They are the glad 
effects of taking back the consequence of sickness to its cause. 
The 
body is released, because the mind acknowledges "this is not DONE 
TO me, but I am doing this." And thus the mind is free to make an¬ 
other choice instead. 
Beginning here, salvation will proceed to 
change the course of every step in the descent to separation, until all 
the steps have been retraced, the ladder gone, and ALL the dream¬ 
ing of the world undone. 


T 28 D. 
The Agreement to Join (Notes 1955 12:90) 

T 28 D l. 
What waits in perfect certainty BEYOND salvation is not our 
concern. 
For you have barely started to allow your first, uncertain 
steps to be directed up the ladder separation led you down. 
The 
miracle alone is your concern at present. 
Here is where we must 
BEGIN. 
And, having started, will the way be made serene and sim¬ 
ple in the rising up to waking and the ending of the dream. 
When 
you accept a miracle, you do not ADD your dream of fear to one 
that is ALREADY being dreamed. 
Without SUPPORT the dream 
will fade away, without effects. 
For it is your SUPPORT that 
strengthens it. 
No mind is sick until another mind AGREES that 

they are separate. 
And thus, it is their JOINT decision to be sick. 

T(976) - 802 - 


1-886 


896 


Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


T 28 D 2. 
If you WITHHOLD agreement, and accept the part YOU 
play in making sickness real, the other mind cannot project its guilt 
without your aid in LETTING it perceive itself as separate and apart 
from YOU. 
Thus is the body NOT perceived as sick by BOTH your 
minds, from SEPARATE points of view. 
UNITING with a brother's 
mind prevents the CAUSE of sickness, and perceived effects. 
Heal¬ 
ing is the effect of minds that join, as sickness comes from minds 
that separate. 
The miracle does nothing just because the minds ARE 
joined, and CANNOT separate. 
Yet, in the dreaming, has this been 
reversed, and separate minds are seen as bodies, which ARE sepa¬ 
rated, and which cannot JOIN. 


T 28 D 3. 
Do not allow your brother to be sick, for if he is, have YOU 
abandoned him to his own dream, by SHARING it with him. 
He has 
not seen the cause of sickness where it is, and YOU have overlooked 
the gap between you, where the sickness has been bred. 
Thus are 
you JOINED in sickness, to preserve the little gap unhealed, where 
sickness is kept carefully protected, cherished, and upheld by firm 
belief, lest God should come to bridge the little gap that leads to 
Him. 
Fight not His coming with illusions, for it is His coming that 
you WANT above all things that seem to glisten in the dream. 
The 
end of dreaming is the end of FEAR, and love was NEVER in the 
world of dreams. 


T 28 D 4. 
The gap IS little. 
Yet it holds the seeds of pestilence and 
every form of ill, because it is a WISH to keep apart, and NOT to 
join. 
And thus it seems to give a CAUSE to sickness which is NOT 
its cause. 
The PURPOSE of the gap is all the cause that sickness has. 

For it was made to keep you separated in a body which you see as if 
it were the CAUSE of pain. 
The cause of pain is separation, NOT the 
body, which is only its EFFECT. 
Yet separation is but empty space, 
enclosing nothing, doing nothing, and as unsubstantial as the vacant 
place between the ripples that a ship has made in passing by. 
And 
covered just as fast, as water rushes in to close the gap, and as the 
waves, in joining, cover it. 



897 


1-887 


Volume I Text 


T 28 D 5. 
Where is the gap BETWEEN the waves, when they have 
joined, and covered up the space which seemed to keep them sepa¬ 
rate for a little while? T(977) - 803 - Where is the grounds for sickness, 
when the minds have joined to close the gap BETWEEN them, 
where the weeds of sickness seemed to grow? God builds the 
bridge, but only in the space left clean and vacant by the miracle. 

The seeds of sickness and the shame of sin He CANNOT bridge, for 
He cannot destroy the alien will that He created not. 
Let its effects 
be gone, and clutch them not with eager hands, to keep them for 
yourself. 
The miracle will brush them all aside, and thus make room 
for Him Who wills to come, and bridge His Son's returning to Him¬ 
self. 


T 28 D 6. 
Count, then, the silver miracles and golden dreams of hap¬ 
piness as all the treasures you would keep within the storehouse of 
the world. 
The door is open, NOT to thieves, but to your starving 
brothers, who mistook for gold a shining pebble, and who stored 
away a heap of snow that shone like silver . 
899 They have nothing left 
behind the open door. 
What is the world except a little gap, per¬ 
ceived to tear eternity apart, and break it into days and months and 
years? And what are YOU who live within the world, except a pic¬ 
ture of the Son of God in broken pieces, each concealed within a 
separate and uncertain bit of clay? 

T 28 D 7. 
Be not afraid, but let your world be lit with miracles . 
900 And 
where the gap was seen to stand BETWEEN you, join your brother 
there. 
And sickness will be seen WITHOUT a cause. 
The dream of 
healing in forgiveness lies, and gently shows you YOU have never 
sinned. 
The miracle would leave NO proof of guilt, to bring you 
witness to what never WAS. 
And, in your storehouse, it will make a 
place of welcome for your Father and your Self. 
The door is open, 
that all those may come who would no longer starve, and would 

8,9 Matthew 6:19 “Do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy and 
where thieves break in and steal;” 

900 John 6:20 But He said to them, “It is I; do not be afraid.” 


1-888 


898 



Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


enjoy the feast of plenty set before them there. 
And they will meet 
with your invited Guests the miracle has asked to come to you . 
901 
T 28 D 8. 
This is a feast unlike indeed to those the dreaming of the 
world has shown . 
902 For here, the more that anyone receives, the 
more is left for all the rest to share. 
The Guests have brought unlim¬ 
ited supply with Them. 
And no-one is deprived, or can deprive. 

Here is a feast the Father lays before His Son, AND shares it equally 
with him. 
And in Their sharing there can BE no gap, in T(978) - 804 - 
which abundance falters and grows thin. 
Here can the lean years 
enter not , 903 for time waits not upon this feast, which HAS no end. 

For Love has set Its table in the space that seemed to keep your 
Guests APART from you. 
T(979) -805 

T 28 E, The Greater Joining (Notes 1960 12:95) 

T 28 E l. 
Accepting 904 the Atonement 905 for yourself means NOT to 
give support to someone's dream of sickness and of death. 
It means 
that you share NOT his wish to separate, and let him turn illusions 


901 Luke 14:16-23 Then He said to him, “A certain man gave a great supper and invited many, and sent 
his servant at supper time to say to those who were invited, “Come, for all things are now ready.' But 
they all with one accord began to make excuses. 
The first said to him, “I have bought a piece of ground, 
and I must go and see it. 
I ask you to have me excused.' And another said, “I have bought five yoke of 
oxen, and I am going to test them. 
I ask you to have me excused.' Still another said, “I have married a 
wife, and therefore I cannot come.' So that servant came and reported these things to his master. 
Then 
the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant, “Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of 
the city, and bring in here the poor and the maimed and the lame and the blind.' And the servant said, 
“Master, it is done as you commanded, and still there is room.' Then the master said to the servant, “Go 
out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. 


902 John 6 4-14 Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand. 
Jesus therefore lifting up his eyes, 
and seeing that a great multitude cometh unto him, saith unto Philip, Whence are we to buy bread, that 
these may eat? And this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do. 
Philip answered 
him, Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one may take a little. 
One 
of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, saith unto him, There is a lad here, which hath five 
barley loaves, and two fishes: but what are these among so many? Jesus said, Make the people sit down. 

Now there was much grass in the place. 
So the men sat down, in number about five thousand. 
Jesus 
therefore took the loaves; and having given thanks, he distributed to them that were set down; likewise 
also of the fishes as much as they would. 
And when they were filled, he saith unto his disciples, Gather 
up the broken pieces which remain over, that nothing be lost. 
So they gathered them up, and filled 
twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which remained over unto them that had 
eaten. 
When therefore the people saw the sign which he did, they said, This is of a truth the prophet 
that cometh into the world. 


903 Genesis 41:27 And the seven thin and ugly cows which came up after them are seven years, and the 
seven empty heads blighted by the east wind are seven years of famine. 


904 March 3, 1968 

905 The Urtext manuscript does not capitalize this but the Notes and all other versions do. 



899 


1-889 



Volume I Text 


on himself. 
Nor do you wish that they be turned instead on YOU. 

Thus have they NO effects. 
And YOU are free of dreams of pain be¬ 
cause you let HIM be. 
UNLESS you help him, YOU will suffer pain 
with him because that is your wish. 
And you become a figure in HIS 
dream of pain, as he in YOURS. 
So do you BOTH become illusions, 
and without identity. 
You could be anyone or anything, depending 
on whose evil dream you share. 
You can be sure of just ONE thing; 
that you are evil, for you share in dreams of fear. 


T 28 E 2. 
There is a way of finding certainty RIGHT HERE AND 
NOW. 
Refuse to be a part of fearful dreams, WHATEVER form they 
take. 
For you will lose identity in them. 
You FIND yourself by NOT 
accepting them as causing you, and GIVING you effects. 
You stand 
apart from them, but NOT apart from him who dreams them. 
Thus 
you separate the dreamer from the dream, and join with ONE, but 
let the OTHER go. 
The dream is but illusion in the mind. 
And with 
the MIND you WOULD unite, but NEVER with the dream. 
It is the 
DREAM you fear, and NOT the mind. 
You see them as the same, 
because you think that YOU are but a dream. 
And what is real and 
what is but illusion IN YOURSELF you do not know and cannot tell 
apart. 


T 28 E 3. 
Like you, your brother thinks HE is a dream. 
Share not in his 
illusion of himself. 
For YOUR identity depends on his reality. 
Think, 
rather, of him as a mind in which illusions still persist, but as a mind 
which brother is to you. 
He is not brother made by what he 
DREAMS, nor is his body, "hero" of the dream, your brother. 
It is 
his REALITY that is your brother, as is yours to him. 
Your mind and 
his ARE joined in brotherhood. 
His body and his dreams but SEEM 
to make a little gap, where yours have joined with his. 
And yet, be¬ 
tween your MINDS there IS no gap. 
To join his dreams is thus to 

meet him NOT, because his dreams would SEPARATE from you. 

T(980) -806 

T 28 E 4. 
Therefore release him, merely by your claim on brother¬ 
hood, and NOT on dreams of fear. 
Let him acknowledge who he IS, 
by not supporting his illusions by your faith, for if you do, you will 


1-890 


900 


Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


have faith in YOURS. 
With faith in yours, HE will not be released, 
and YOU are kept in bondage to his dreams. 
And dreams of fear 
will haunt the little gap, inhabited but by illusions which you have 
SUPPORTED in each other's minds. 
Be certain, if you do YOUR 
part, he will do his, for he will JOIN you where YOU stand. 
Call not 
to him to meet you in the gap BETWEEN you, or you MUST believe 
that it is YOUR reality, as well as his. 
You CANNOT do his part, but 
this you DO when you become a passive figure in his dream IN¬ 
STEAD of dreamer of your own. 


T 28 E 5. 
Identity in dreams is meaningless BECAUSE the dreamer 
and the dream are one. 
Who shares a dream must BE the dream he 
shares, because, BY sharing, is a cause produced. 
You share confu¬ 
sion, and you ARE confused, for in the gap no stable self exists. 


What is the same seems different, because what IS the same appears 
to be unlike. 
His dreams are yours, because you LET them be. 
But, if 
you took your OWN away, would he be free of them, and of his 
own as well. 
Your dreams are witnesses to his, and his attest the 
truth of yours. 
But if you see there IS no truth in yours, his dreams 
will disappear before his eyes, and he will understand what MADE 
the dream. 


T 28 E 6. 
The Holy Spirit is in BOTH your minds, and He IS One, be¬ 
cause there is no gap that separates His Oneness from Itself. 
The gap 
between your bodies matters not, for what is joined in Him is AL¬ 
WAYS one. 
No-one is sick, if someone ELSE accepts his union 
WITH him. 
His desire to be a sick and separated mind can NOT re¬ 
main without a witness or a cause. 
And both ARE gone, if someone 
wills to be united with him. 
He has dreamed that he was separated 
from his brother, who, by sharing NOT his dream, has left the space 
between them vacant. 
And the Father comes to join His Son the 
Holy Spirit joined. 
T(981) -807 

T 28 E 7. 
The Holy Spirit's Function is to take the broken picture of 
the Son of God, and put the pieces into place again. 
This holy pic¬ 
ture, healed entirely, does He hold out to every separate piece that 
thinks it is a picture IN ITSELF. 
To each he offers his identity, which 


901 


1-891 


Volume I Text 


the WHOLE picture represents, instead of just a little, broken bit, 
which he insisted was himself. 
And when he sees THIS picture, he 
will RECOGNIZE himself. 
If you share not your brother's evil 
dreams, this IS the picture that the miracle will place within the little 
gap, left clean of all the seeds of sickness and of sin. 
And here the 
Father will receive His Son, because His Son was gracious to him¬ 
self. 


T 28 E 8.1 thank you. 
Father, knowing you will come to close each 
little gap that lies between the broken pieces of Your holy Son . 
906 
Your Holiness, complete and perfect, lies in every one of them. 
And 
they ARE joined, because what is in one IS in them all. 
How holy is 
the smallest grain of sand, when it is recognized as being part of the 
completed picture of God's Son. 
The forms the broken pieces seem 
to take mean nothing. 
For the Whole is in each one. 
And every as¬ 
pect of the Son of God is just the same as every other part. 
Join not 
your brother's dream, but join with HIM, and where you join His 
Son, the Father IS . 
907 

T 28 E 9. 
Who seeks for substitutes, when he perceives HE HAS LOST 
NOTHING? Who would WANT to have the "benefits" of sickness, 
when he has received the simple happiness of health? What God has 
given cannot BE a loss, and what is not of Him has NO effects. 


What, then, would you perceive within the gap? The seeds of sick¬ 
ness come from the belief that there is JOY in separation, and its giv¬ 
ing up WOULD BE A SACRIFICE. 
But miracles are the result, when 
you do not insist on seeing in the gap what is not there. 
Your will¬ 
ingness to LET illusions go is all the Healer of God's Son requires. 



906 Matthew 11:25 At that time Jesus answered and said, “I thank You, Father, Lord of heaven and 
earth, that You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent and have revealed them to babes. 
“ 

907 John 17:20-13 “Neither for these only do I pray, but for them also that believe on me through their 
word; that they may all be one; even as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in 
us: that the world may believe that thou didst send me. 
And the glory which thou hast given me I have 
given unto them; that they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be 
perfected into one; that the world may know that thou didst send me, and lovedst them, even as thou 
lovedst me.” 


1-892 


902 



Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


He will place the miracle of healing where the seeds of sickness 
were. 
And there will be NO loss, but ONLY gain. 
T(982) -808 908 

T 28 F. 
The Alternate to Dreams of Fear (Notes 106712:102) 

T 28 F l. 
What is a sense of sickness but a sense of limitation? Of a 
splitting OFF and separating FROM? A gap perceived BETWEEN 
ourselves and what is seen as health? The good is seen OUTSIDE; 
the evil, IN. 
And thus is sickness separating OFF the self from good, 
and KEEPING evil there. 
God is the ALTERNATE to dreams of fear. 

Who shares in them can NEVER share in Him. 
But who WITH¬ 
DRAWS his mind from sharing them IS sharing Him. 
There IS no 
other choice. 
Except you share it, NOTHING can exist, and YOU 
exist because God shared His Will with you, that His creation might 
create. 


T 28 F 2. 
It is the SHARING of the evil dreams, of hate and malice, 
bitterness and death, of sin and suffering, of pain and loss, that 
makes them real. 
UNSHARED they are perceived as meaningless. 

The fear is gone from them BECAUSE YOU DID NOT GIVE THEM 
YOUR SUPPORT. 
Where fear has gone, there love MUST come, be¬ 
cause there ARE but these alternatives. 
Where one appears, the 
other Disappears. 
And which you SHARE becomes the only one 
you HAVE. 
You HAVE the one which you accept, because it is the 
only one you WANT. 
You share NO evil dreams, if you forgive the 
dreamer, and perceive that he is NOT the dream he made. 
And so 
he CANNOT be a part of YOURS, from which you BOTH are free. 

Forgiveness SEPARATES the dreamer from the evil dream, and thus 
releases him. 


T 28 F 3. 
Remember if you SHARE an evil dream, you will believe 
you ARE the dream you share. 
And, fearing it, you will not WANT 
to know your own identity, because you think that IT is fearful. 
And 
you WILL deny your Self, and walk upon an alien ground which 
your Creator did not make, and where you seem to be a "some¬ 
thing" you are not. 
You WILL make war upon your Self, Which 


908 March 5, 1968 


903 


1-893 



Volume I Text 


SEEMS to be your enemy, and WILL attack your brother, as a part of 
what you hate. 
There is no compromise. 
You are your Self, or an il¬ 
lusion. 
What CAN be between illusion and the truth? A middle 
ground, where you can be a thing that is NOT you, MUST be a 
dream, and CANNOT be the truth. 
T(983) -809 909 

T 28 F 4. 
You have conceived a little gap between illusions and the 
truth to be the place where all your safety lies, and where your Self 
is safely hidden by what you have made. 
Here is a world estab¬ 
lished that is sick, and this the world the body's eyes perceive. 
Here 
are the sounds it hears, the voices which its ears were made to hear. 

Yet sights and sounds the body can perceive are meaningless. 
It 
cannot see nor hear. 
It does not know what seeing IS; what listening 
is FOR. 
It is as little able to perceive as it can judge, or understand, 
or know. 
Its eyes are blind, its ears are deaf. 
It can NOT think, and 
so it cannot HAVE effects. 


T 28 F 5. 
What is there God created can be sick? And what that He 
created not can BE? Let not your eyes behold a dream; your ears 910 
bear witness to illusion. 
They were made to look upon a world that 
is not there; to hear the voices that can make no sounds. 
Yet are 
there other sounds and other sights which can be seen and heard 
and UNDERSTOOD. 
For eyes and ears are senses without sense, 
and what they see and hear they but report. 
It is not THEY that hear 
and see, but YOU, who PUT TOGETHER every jagged piece, each 
senseless scrap and shred of evidence, and MAKE a witness to the 
world you want. 


T 28 F 6. 
Let not the body's ears and eyes perceive these countless 
fragments seen within the gap that YOU imagined, and let THEM 
persuade their maker his imaginings were real. 
Creation proves re¬ 
ality because it SHARES the function ALL creation shares. 
It is not 
made of little bits of glass, a piece of wood, a thread or two perhaps, 
and put together to ATTEST its truth. 
Reality does not depend on 


909 March 12, 1968 

910 The Urtext manuscript has “eyes” but the Notes and HLC have “ears” which appears to be correct. 



1-894 


904 



Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


THIS. 
There IS no gap which separates the truth from dreams and 
from illusions. 
Truth has left no room for them in ANY place or 
time. 
For It fills every place and every time, and makes them wholly 
indivisible. 
T(984) -810 

T 28 F 7. 
You who believe there is a little gap between you do not un¬ 
derstand that it is HERE that you are kept as prisoners in a world 
perceived to be EXISTING here. 
The world you see does not exist 
BECAUSE the place where you perceive it is not real. 
The gap is 
carefully concealed in fog, and misty pictures rise to cover it with 
vague, uncertain forms and changing shapes, forever unsubstantial 
and unsure. 
Yet in the gap is NOTHING. 
And there ARE no awe¬ 
some secrets and no darkened tombs where terror rises from the 
bones of death. 
Look at the little gap, and you behold the innocence 
and emptiness of sin that you will see within yourself, when you 
have lost the fear of recognizing love. 
T(985) -8ll 911 

T 28 G. 
The Secret Vows (Notes 1972 12:107) 

T 28 G l. 
Who punishes the body is insane. 
For here the little gap is 
SEEN, and yet it is NOT here. 
It has not judged ITSELF, nor made 
itself to be what it is not. 
IT does not seek to make of pain a joy, and 
look for lasting pleasure in the dust. 
It does not TELL you what its 
purpose is, and CANNOT understand what it is for. 
IT DOES NOT 
VICTIMIZE, because it has no will, no preferences, and NO 
DOUBTS. 
It does not wonder what it is. 
And so it has no NEED to 
be competitive. 
It CAN be victimized, but CANNOT feel itself as 
victim. 
It accepts no role, but does what it is told, WITHOUT attack. 


T 28 G 2. 
It is indeed a senseless point of view to hold responsible for 
sight a thing that cannot see, and blame it for the sounds you do not 
like, although it cannot hear. 
IT suffers not the punishment you 
give, because it HAS no feeling. 
It behaves in ways you want, but 
NEVER makes the choice. 
It is not born and does not die. 
It can but 
follow aimlessly the path on which it has been set. 
And if that path 
is changed, it walks as easily another way. 
It takes no sides, and 


911 March 23, 1968 


905 


1-895 



Volume I Text 


judges not the road it travels. 
It perceives no gap because IT DOES 
NOT HATE. 
It can be USED for hate, but it cannot be hateful MADE 
thereby. 


T 28 G 3. 
The thing you hate and fear and loathe and WANT, the 
body does not know. 
You send it forth to SEEK for separation and 
BE separate. 
And THEN you hate it, NOT for what it is, but for the 
uses you have MADE of it. 
You shrink from what IT sees and what 
IT hears, and hate its frailty and its littleness. 
And you despise its 
acts, but NOT your own. 
It sees and acts for YOU. 
It hears YOUR 
voice. 
And it is frail and little by YOUR wish. 
It SEEMS to punish 
you, and thus DESERVE your hatred for the limitations which it 
brings to you. 
Yet you have made of it a symbol of the limitations 
which you want your MIND to have and see and KEEP. 
T(986) -812 

T 28 G 4. 
The body REPRESENTS the gap between the little bit of 
mind you call your own, and all the rest of what is REALLY yours. 

You hate it, yet you think it IS your self, and that, WITHOUT it, 
would your self be lost. 
This is the secret vow that you have made 
with every brother who would walk apart. 
This is the secret oath 
you take again whenever you perceive yourself attacked. 
No-one 
can suffer if he does NOT see himself attacked, AND LOSING BY 
ATTACK. 
Unstated and unheard in consciousness is every pledge to 
sickness. 
Yet it is a promise to another to be hurt by him, and to at¬ 
tack him in return. 


T 28 G 5. 
Sickness is anger taken out upon the body, so that IT will 
suffer pain. 
It is the obvious effect of what was made in secret, IN 
AGREEMENT with another's secret wish to be apart from you, as 
you would be apart from him. 
Unless you BOTH agree this is your 
wish, it CAN have no effects. 
Whoever says, "There IS no gap be¬ 
tween my mind and yours," has kept GOD's promise, NOT his tiny 
oath to be forever faithful unto death. 
And by his healing IS his 
brother healed. 
Let THIS be your agreement with each one; that you 
be one with him and NOT apart. 
And he will keep the promise that 
you make with him, because it is the one which he has made to God, 
as God has made to him. 



1-896 


906 


Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


T 28 G 6. 
God keeps His promises; His Son keeps his. 
In his creation 
did his Father say, "You are beloved of Me and I of you forever. 
Be 
you perfect as Myself , 912 for you can never be apart from Me." His 
Son remembers not that he replied "I will," though in that promise 
he was born. 
Yet God reminds him of it every time he does not share 
a promise to be sick, but lets his mind be healed and unified. 
His 
secret vows are powerless before the Will of God, Whose promises 
he shares. 
And what he substitutes is NOT his will, who has made 
promise of himself to God. 
T(987) -813 913 

T 28 H. 
The Beautiful Relationship (Notes 1978 12:113) 

T 28 H l. 
God asks for nothing, and His Son, like Him, need ask for 
nothing. 
For there is no lack in him. 
An empty space, a little gap, 
would BE a lack. 
And it is only there that he could want for some¬ 
thing he has not. 
A space where God is not, a gap between the Fa¬ 
ther and the Son is NOT the Will of either, who have promised to be 
One. 
God's promise is a promise to HIMSELF, and there is no-one 
who could BE untrue to what He wills as part of what He IS. 
The 
promise that there IS no gap between Himself and what He is can¬ 
not BE false. 
What will can come between what MUST be One, and 
in Whose Wholeness there can BE no gaps? 

T 28 H 2. 
The beautiful relationship you have with all your brothers is 
a part of you BECAUSE it is a part of God Himself. 
Are you not sick 
if you deny yourself your wholeness and your health, the Source of 
help, the call to healing and the Call to heal? Your Savior waits for 
healing, and the world waits with him. 
Nor are YOU apart from it. 

For healing will be one, or not at all, its oneness being where the 
healing LIES. 
What could CORRECT for separation but its opposite? 
There is no middle ground, in ANY aspect of salvation. 
You accept 
it wholly, or accept it not. 
What is unseparated must be JOINED. 

And what is joined cannot BE separate. 



912 Matthew 5:48 “Therefore you shall be perfect, just as your Father in heaven is perfect.” 

913 March 26, 1968 


907 


1-897 



Volume I Text 


T 28 H 3. 
Either there IS a gap between you and your brother, or you 
ARE as one. 
There is no in between, no other choice, and no alle¬ 
giance to be split BETWEEN the two. 
A split allegiance is but faith¬ 
lessness to both, and merely sets you spinning round, to grasp un¬ 
certainly at any straw that seems to hold some promise of relief. 
Yet 
who can build his home upon a straw, and count on it as shelter 
from the wind ? 914 The body can be made a home like this BECAUSE 
it lacks foundation in the truth. 
And yet, BECAUSE it does, it can be 
seen as NOT your home, but merely as an aid to help you reach the 
home where God abides. 
T(988) -814 

T 28 H 4. 
With THIS as purpose IS the body healed. 
It is NOT used to 
witness to the dream of separation and disease. 
Nor is it idly blamed 
for what it did not do. 
It serves to help the HEALING of God's Son, 
and, for THIS purpose, it cannot BE sick. 
It will not join a purpose 
not your own, and you have chosen that it NOT be sick. 
All miracles 
are based upon this choice, and GIVEN you the instant it is made. 

No forms of sickness are immune, because the choice cannot be 
MADE in terms of form. 
The choice of SICKNESS seems to be a 
form, yet it is one, as is its opposite. 
And YOU are sick or well, ac¬ 
cordingly. 


T 28 H 5. 
But NEVER you alone. 
This world is but the dream that you 
can BE alone, and think without affecting those apart from you. 
To 
be alone MUST mean you are apart, and if you are, you cannot BUT 
be sick. 
This SEEMS to prove that you must be APART. 
Yet all it 
means is that you tried to keep a promise to be true to faithlessness. 

Yet faithlessness IS sickness. 
It is like the house upon a straw. 
It 
SEEMS to be quite solid and substantial IN ITSELF. 
But its stability 
cannot be judged APART from its foundation. 
If it rests on straws, 
there is no need to bar the door and lock the windows, and make 


914 Matthew 7:24-27 “Therefore whoever hears these sayings of Mine, and does them, I will liken him 
to a wise man who built his house on the rock: and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds 
blew and beat on that house; and it did not fall, for it was founded on the rock. 


“But everyone who hears these sayings of Mine, and does not do them, will be like a foolish man who 
built his house on the sand: and the rain descended, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on 
that house; and it fell. 
And great was its fall.” 


1-898 


908 



Chapter 28 - The Undoing of Fear 


fast the bolts. 
The wind WILL topple it, and rain WILL come, and 
carry it into oblivion . 
915 

T 28 H 6. 
What is the SENSE in seeking to be safe in what was MADE 
for danger and for fear? Why burden it with further locks and 
chains and heavy anchors, when its weakness lies, NOT in itself, but 
in the frailty of the little gap of nothingness whereon it stands? 

What CAN be safe which rests upon a shadow? Would you build 
your home upon what WILL collapse beneath a feather's weight? 
Your home is built upon your brother's health; upon his happiness, 
his sinlessness, and everything his Father promised him. 
No secret 
promise you have made INSTEAD has shaken the Foundation of his 
home. 
T(989) -815 

T 28 H 7. 
The winds will blow upon it and the rain will beat against it, 
but with NO effect. 
The world will wash away, and yet this house 
will stand forever, for its strength lies NOT within itself alone. 
It is 
an ark of safety, resting on God's promise, that His Son is safe for¬ 
ever in Himself . 
916 What gap can interpose itself between the safety 
of this shelter and its Source? From here, the body can be seen as 
what it is, and neither less nor more in worth than the extent to 
which it can be used to liberate God's Son unto his home. 
And, with 
this holy purpose, is it made a home of holiness a little while, be¬ 
cause it shares your Father's Will with You. 
T(990) -816 917 


913 Matthew 7:26-27 "And every one that heareth these words of mine, and doeth them not, shall be 
likened unto a foolish man, who built his house upon the sand: and the rain descended, and the floods 
came, and the winds blew, and smote upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall thereof.” 

916 Genesis 7:9 two by two they went into the ark to Noah, male and female, as God had commanded 
Noah. 


917 March 28, 1968 


909 


1-899 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 29 - The Awakening 

T 29 A. 
Introduction (Notes 1083 12:118) 

T 29 A l. 
There is no time, no place, no state where God is absent. 

There is NOTHING to be feared. 
There is no way in which a gap 
could be conceived of in the Wholeness that is His. 
The compromise 
the least and littlest gap would represent in His eternal Love is quite 
impossible. 
For it would mean His Love could harbor just a hint of 
hate; His gentleness turn sometimes to attack; and His eternal pa¬ 
tience sometimes fail. 
All this do you BELIEVE, when you perceive 
a gap between your brother and yourself. 
How could you trust Him, 
then? For He must be deceptive in His Love. 
Be wary, then; let Him 
not come too close, and leave a gap between you and His Love, 
through which you can escape if there be need for you to flee. 


T 29 A 2. 
Here is the fear of God most plainly seen. 
For love is treach¬ 
erous to those who fear, since fear and hate can NEVER be apart. 

No-one who hates but is afraid of love, and therefore MUST he be 
afraid of God. 
Certain it is he knows not what love MEANS. 
He 
fears to love and loves to hate, and so he thinks that love is fearful; 
hate is love. 
This is the consequence the little gap MUST bring to 
those who cherish it, and think that it is their salvation and their 
hope. 
The fear of God! — the greatest obstacle that peace must flow 
across has not yet gone. 
The rest are past, but this one still remains 
to block your path, and make the way to light seem dark and fear¬ 
ful, perilous and bleak. 


T 29 A 3. 
You had DECIDED that your brother is your enemy. 

SOMETIMES a friend, perhaps, provided that your separate inter¬ 
ests made your friendship possible a little while. 
But NOT without a 
gap between you, lest he turn again into an enemy. 
Let him come 
close to you, and you jumped back; as you approached, he instantly 
withdrew. 
A cautious friendship, limited in scope and carefully re¬ 
stricted in amount, became the treaty you had made with him. 
You 
shared a qualified entente, in which a clause of separation was a 


1-900 


910 


Chapter 29 The Awakening 


point on which you both agreed to keep intact. 
And violating this 
was thought 918 to be a breach of treaty not to be allowed. 
T(99l) -817 

T 29 B. 
The Closing of the Gap (Notes 1985 12:120) 

T 29 B l. 
The gap between you is NOT one of space between two 
separate bodies. 
This but SEEMS to be dividing off your separate 
minds. 
It is the SYMBOL of a promise, made to meet when you pre¬ 
fer, and separate until you both elect to meet again. 
And then your 
bodies seem to get in touch, and signify a meeting place to join. 
But 
always is it possible to go your separate ways. 
Conditional upon the 
right to separate will you agree to meet from time to time, and keep 
apart in intervals of separation, which protect you from the "sacri¬ 
fice" of love. 
THE BODY SAVES YOU, for it gets away from total 
"sacrifice," and gives you time in which to build again your separate 
selves, which you believe DIMINISH as you meet. 


T 29 B 2. 
The body COULD not separate your minds, unless you 
WANTED it to be a cause of separation and of 919 distance seen be¬ 
tween you. 
Thus do you ENDOW it with a power that lies NOT 
within itself. 
And herein lies its power over you. 
For now you think 
that IT determines when you meet, and limits 920 your ability to make 
communion with each other's mind. 
And now it TELLS you where 
to go, and how to go there; what is feasible for you to undertake, 
and what you CANNOT do. 
It dictates what its health can tolerate, 
and what will tire it and make it sick. 
And its "inherent" weaknesses 
set up the limitations on what YOU would do, and keep your PUR¬ 
POSE limited and weak. 


T 29 B 3. 
The body WILL accommodate to this, if you would have it 
so. 
It WILL allow but limited indulgences in "love," with intervals 
of hatred in between. 
And it WILL take command of when to 
"love," and when to shrink more safely into fear. 
It will be sick BE¬ 
CAUSE you do not know what loving means. 
And so you MUST 


918 Urtext manuscript has it typed “though" the final “t” is handwritten in. 


919 The word “of’ is handwritten into the Urtext manuscript. 
The word does appear in the Notes. 


920 Urtext manuscript has it typed “limit” the final “s” is handwritten. 
The Notes also has it as “limits.” 


911 


1-901 



Volume I Text 


misuse each circumstance and everyone you meet, and see in them a 
purpose NOT their own. 
It is not love that asks a 921 sacrifice. 
But fear 
DEMANDS the sacrifice of love, for in love's presence fear cannot 
abide. 
For hate to be maintained love MUST be feared, and only 
SOMETIMES present; SOMETIMES gone. 
T(992) -818 

T 29 B 4. 
Thus is love seen as treacherous, because IT seems to come 
and go uncertainly, and offer no stability to you. 
You do NOT see 
how limited and weak is YOUR allegiance, and how frequently you 
have demanded that it go away, and leave you quietly alone in 
"peace." The body, innocent of ANY goal, is your excuse for vari¬ 
able goals YOU hold, and force the body to maintain. 
You do not 
fear its weakness, but its lack of strength OR weakness. 
Would you 
recognize that NOTHING stands between you? Would you know 
there IS no gap behind which you can hide? 

T 29 B 5. 
There IS a shock that comes to those who learn their Savior 
is their enemy no more. 
There IS a wariness that is aroused by learn¬ 
ing that the body is not real. 
And there ARE overtones of seeming 
fear around the happy message "God is Love." 922 Yet all that hap¬ 
pens when the gap is gone is peace eternal. 
Nothing MORE than 
that, and nothing less. 
Without the fear of God, what could induce 
you to abandon Him? What toys or trinkets in the gap could serve to 
hold you back an instant from His Love? Would you ALLOW the 
body to say "No" to Heaven's calling, were you not afraid to find a 
LOSS of self in finding God? And CAN your Self be lost by being 
found ? 923 T(993) -819 924 


921 Urtext manuscript has it typed “for”, this is crossed out and “a” is typed above it. 
This is consistent 
with the Notes. 


22 1 John 4:16 He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love; 

1 John 4:8 And we know and have believed the love which God hath in us. 
God is love; and he that 
abideth in love abideth in God, and God abideth in him. 


923 Luke 15:24 ‘For this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' And they began 
to be merry. 


Luke 15:32 It was right that we should make merry and be glad, for your brother was dead and is alive 
again, and was lost and is found. 


924 April 1, 1968 


1-902 


912 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 

T 29 C. 
The Coming of the Guest (Notes 1989 12:124) 

T 29 C 1 . 
Why would you not perceive it as RELEASE from suffering 
to learn that you are free? Why would you not ACCLAIM the truth, 
instead of looking on it as an enemy? Why does an EASY path, so 
clearly marked it is impossible to lose the way seem thorny, rough, 
and far too difficult for you to follow? Is it not because you see it as 
the road to hell, instead of looking on it as a simple way, without a 
sacrifice or ANY loss, to find yourself in Heaven and in God? Until 
you realize you give up NOTHING; until you understand there IS 
no loss; you will have some regrets about the way that you have 
chosen. 
And you will NOT see the many gains your choice has of¬ 
fered you. 


T 29 c 2. 
Yet, though you do not see them, they are there. 
Their 
CAUSE has been effected, and they MUST be present were their 
cause has entered in. 
You have accepted healing's Cause, and so it 
MUST be you are healed. 
And, being healed, the power to heal must 
ALSO now be yours. 
The miracle is not a separate thing that hap¬ 
pens suddenly, as an effect without a cause, nor is it, in itself, a 
cause. 
But where its Cause is MUST it be. 
Now IS it caused, though 
not as yet perceived. 
And its effects are THERE, though not yet seen. 

Look inward now, and you will not behold a reason for regret, but 
cause indeed for glad rejoicing and for hope of peace. 


T 29 c 3. 
It HAS been hopeless to attempt to find the hope of peace 
upon a battleground. 
It HAS been futile to demand escape from sin 
and pain of what was made to serve the function of RETAINING sin 
and pain. 
For pain and sin are ONE illusion, as are hate and fear, 
attack and guilt but one. 
Where they are causeless, their effects ARE 
gone, and love MUST come wherever they are not. 
Why are you not 
rejoicing? You ARE free of pain and sickness, misery and loss, and 
ALL effects of hatred and attack. 
No more is pain your friend and 

guilt your god, and you should WELCOME the effects of love. 
T(994) 
-820 

T 29 c 4. 
Your Guest HAS come. 
You asked Him and He came. 
You 
did not hear Him enter, for you did not wholly welcome Him. 
And 


913 


1-903 


Volume I Text 


yet His gifts came with Him. 
He has laid them at your feet, and asks 
you now that you will look on them, and take them for your own. 


He NEEDS your help in giving them to all who walk apart, believ¬ 
ing they are separate and alone. 
They WILL be healed when you 
accept your gifts, because your Guest will welcome everyone whose 
feet have touched the holy ground 925 whereon you stand, and where 
His gifts for them are laid. 


T 29 c 5. 
You do not see how much you now can GIVE, because of 
everything you have received. 
Yet He Who entered in but waits for 
YOU to come where you invited HIM to be. 
There is no other place 
where He can find His host, nor where His host can meet with Him. 

And nowhere else His gifts of peace and joy, and all the happiness 
His Presence brings can be obtained. 
For they are where He is that 
brought them with Him, that they might be yours. 
You can 926 not see 
your Guest, but you CAN see the gifts He brought. 
And when you 
LOOK on them, you will believe His Presence MUST be there. 
For 
what you now can do could not BE done without the love and grace 
His Presence holds. 
T(995) -821 927 

T 29 c 6. 
Such is the promise of the living God; His Son have life, and 
every living thing is part of him, and nothing else has life. 
What 
YOU have "given" life is NOT alive, and symbolizes but your wish 
to be alive APART from life, alive in death, with death perceived as 
life, and living, death. 
Confusion follows on confusion here, for ON 
confusion has this world been based, and there is nothing else it 
rests upon. 
Its basis does not change, although it SEEMS to be in 
constant change. 
But what is that except the state confusion really 
MEANS? Stability to those who are confused is meaningless. 
And 
shift and change become the law on which they predicate their lives. 



925 Exodus 3:4-5 And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called unto him out of the 
midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. 
And he said, Here am I. 
And he said, Draw not nigh hither: 
put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. 


926 Urtext manuscript has it typed “do” this is crossed out and “can” is handwritten in. 
The Notes glyph 
would suggest “cannot.” 

927 April 5, 1968 


1-904 


914 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


T 29 c 7. 
The body does not change. 
It represents the larger dream 
that change is POSSIBLE. 
To change is to attain a state unlike the 
one in which you found yourself before. 
There IS no change in im¬ 
mortality, and Heaven knows it not. 
Yet here on earth, it has a dou¬ 
ble purpose, for it can be made to teach opposing things. 
And they 
reflect the teacher who is teaching them. 
The body can APPEAR to 
change with time, with sickness or with health, and with events that 
seem to alter it. 
And this but means the mind remains unchanged in 
its belief of what the PURPOSE of the body is. 


T 29 c 8. 
Sickness is a demand 928 the body be a thing that it is not. 
Its 
NOTHINGNESS is guarantee 929 that it can NOT be sick. 
In your 
demand that it be MORE than this lies the idea of sickness. 
For it 
asks that God be LESS than all He really is. 
What, then, becomes of 
YOU, for it IS you of whom the sacrifice is asked? For He is told that 
part of him BELONGS to Him no longer. 
He must sacrifice your self, 
and in His sacrifice are YOU made more, and He is lessened by the 
loss of you. 
And what is GONE from Him becomes your god, PRO¬ 
TECTING you from being part of Him. 
T(996) -822 

T 29 c 9. 
The body that is asked to be a god WILL be attacked, be¬ 
cause its nothingness has not been recognized. 
And so it seems to be 
a thing with power IN ITSELF. 
As something, it CAN be perceived, 
and thought to feel and act, and hold you in its grasp as prisoner to 
itself. 
And it CAN fail to be what you demanded it to be. 
And you 
WILL hate it for its littleness, unmindful that the failure does not lie 
in that it is not MORE than it should be, but ONLY in YOUR failure 
to perceive that it is nothing. 
Yet its nothingness IS your salvation, 
from which you would flee. 


T 29 C 10. 
As something, is the body asked to be God's enemy, replac¬ 
ing what He is with littleness and limit and despair. 
It is HIS loss 
you celebrate when you behold the body as a thing you love, or look 
upon it as a thing you hate. 
For if He be the sum of everything, then 


928 Originally the word “that” was typed after “demand.” The Notes does not have the extra word. 


929 Urtext manuscript has it typed “guaranteed” the “d” is crossed out, making it consistent with the 
Notes. 



915 


1-905 



Volume I Text 


what is NOT in Him does not exist. 
And His completion IS its noth¬ 
ingness. 
Your Savior is NOT dead, 930 nor does he dwell in what was 
built as temple unto death. 
He lives in God, and it is this that makes 
him Savior unto YOU, and ONLY this. 
His body's nothingness re¬ 
leases yours from sickness and from death. 
For what is yours cannot 
be more NOR less than what is his. 
T(997) -823 931 

T 29 D. 
God's Witnesses (Notes 1997 12:132) 

T 29 D l. 
Condemn your Savior not because he thinks he is a body. 


Far beyond his dreams is his reality. 
But he must learn he is a Sav¬ 
ior 932 first, before he can remember what he is. 
And he must save 
who would BE saved. 
On saving YOU depends his happiness. 
For 
who is Savior, but the one who GIVES salvation? Thus he learns it 
must be his to give. 
UNLESS he gives, he will not know he HAS, for 
giving is the proof of having. 
Only those who think that God is less¬ 
ened by their strength could fail to understand this must be so. 
For 
who COULD give unless he has, and who could lose by giving what 
must be INCREASED thereby? 

T 29 D 2. 
Think you the Father LOST Himself when He created you? 
Was HE made weak because He shared His Love? Was He made 
incomplete by YOUR perfection? Or are you the proof that He IS 
perfect and complete? Deny Him not His witness in the dream His 
Son prefers to his reality. 
He must be Savior FROM the dream he 
made, that he be free of it. 
He must see someone ELSE as NOT a 
body, one with him, without the wall the world has built to keep 
apart all living things who know not that they live. 
Within the 
dream of bodies and of death, is yet one theme 933 of truth. 
No more. 



930 Urtext manuscript has it typed “deaf the letter “d” is handwritten in. 
the Notes rather clearly has 
“death” written hear. 
It cannot really be interpreted as either “deaf’ or “dead.” It would appear from 
the context that the original intent was for this word to be “death” and “deaf’ was actually a “hearing” 
error in transcription which was not caught. 


931 April 8, 1968 

932 Note that “Savior” is here spelled with no “u” 

933 Urtext manuscript has it typed “dream” the word “THEME” is handwritten in with block letters. 

The Notes clearly also has it as “theme.” 


1-906 


916 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


perhaps, than just a tiny spark, a space of light created in the dark, 
where God shines still. 


T 29 D 3. 
You cannot wake yourself. 
But you can LET yourself be 
wakened. 
You can overlook your brother's dreams. 
So perfectly can 
you forgive him his illusions, he becomes your Savior from YOUR 
dreams. 
And as you see him shining in the space of light where God 
abides within the darkness, you will see that God Himself is where 
his body is. 
Before this light the body disappears, as heavy shadows 
MUST give way to light. 
The darkness cannot CHOOSE that it re¬ 
main. 
The coming of the light MEANS it is gone. 
In glory will you 
see your brother then, and understand what REALLY fills the gap 
so long perceived as keeping you apart. 
T(998) -824 

T 29 D 4. 
There, in its place, God's Witness has set forth the gentle 
way of kindness to God's Son. 
Whom you forgive is GIVEN power 
to forgive you your illusions. 
934 By your gift of freedom is it given 
unto YOU. 
Make way for love which you did not create, but which 
you CAN extend. 
On earth this means forgive your brother, that the 
darkness may be lifted from YOUR mind. 
When light has come to 
him through your forgiveness, he will not forget his Savior, leaving 
him unsaved. 
For it was in YOUR face he saw the light that he 
would keep beside him, as he walks through darkness to the ever¬ 
lasting Light. 


T 29 D 5. 
How holy are you, that the Son of God can be your Savior in 
the midst of dreams of desolation and disaster. 
See how eagerly he 
comes, and steps aside from heavy shadows that have hidden him, 
and shines 935 on you in gratitude and love. 
He is himself, but not 
himself alone. 
And as his Father lost not part of Him in your crea¬ 
tion, so the light in him is brighter still, because you gave your light 
to him, to save him from the dark. 
And now the light in you must be 
as bright as shines in him. 
This is the spark that shines within the 


c| ’ 4 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 

933 Originally typed “shine” the final “s” is handwritten in which matches the Notes which has it as 
‘shines.” 


917 


1-907 



Volume I Text 


dream; that you can help him waken, and be sure his waking eyes 
will rest upon you first, and in his glad salvation YOU are saved. 

T(999) -813 936 

T 29 E. 
Dream Roles (Notes 200112:136) 

T 29 E l. 
Do you believe that truth can be but SOME illusions? They 
are dreams BECAUSE they are not true. 
Their EQUAL lack of truth 
becomes the basis for the miracle, which MEANS that you have un¬ 
derstood that dreams are dreams, and that escape depends, NOT on 
the dream, but ONLY on awaking. 
COULD it be some dreams are 
KEPT, and others WAKENED FROM? The choice is NOT between 
which dreams to keep, but ONLY if you want to live in dreams, or 
to awaken from them. 
Thus it is the miracle does not select SOME 
dreams to leave untouched by its beneficence. 
You cannot dream 
some dreams and wake from some. 
For you are either sleeping OR 
awake. 
And dreaming goes with only ONE of these. 


T 29 E 2. 
The dreams you THINK you like would hold you back, as 
much as those in which the fear is seen. 
For EVERY dream is but a 
dream of fear, no matter what the form it seems to take. 
The fear is 
seen within, without, or both. 
Or it can be disguised in pleasant 
form. 
But never is it ABSENT from the dream. 
For fear is the mate¬ 
rial of dreams, from which they ALL are made. 
Their form can 
change, but they cannot be MADE of something else. 
The miracle 
were treacherous indeed if it allowed you still to be afraid, because 
you did not RECOGNIZE the fear. 
You would not then be WILL¬ 
ING to awake, for which the miracle prepares 937 the way. 


T 29 E 3. 
In simplest form, it can be said attack is a response to func¬ 
tion unfulfilled AS YOU PERCEIVE THE FUNCTION. 
It can be in 
you or someone else, but where it is perceived, it will be there it is 
attacked. 
Depression or assault must be the theme of every dream, 
for they are made of fear. 
The thin disguise of pleasure and of joy in 


936 April 12, 1968 

937 Urtext manuscript has it typed “prepared” the final “d” is crossed out and “s” is handwritten in which 
matches the Notes which has it as “prepares.” 


1-908 


918 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


which they may be wrapped but slightly veils the heavy lump of 
fear which is their core. 
And it is THIS the miracle perceives, and 
NOT the wrappings in which it is bound. 
When you are angry, is it 
not because someone has failed to fill the function YOU allotted 
him? And does not THIS become the "reason" your attack is justi¬ 
fied? T(1000) -814 

T 29 E 4. 
The dreams you THINK you like are those in which the 
functions YOU have given have been filled; the needs which YOU 
ascribe to you are met. 
It does not matter if they be fulfilled, or 
merely wanted. 
It is the idea that they EXIST from which the fears 
arise. 
Dreams are not wanted more or less. 
They are desired or not. 

And each one represents some function which you have assigned; 
some goal which an event, or body, or a thing SHOULD represent, 
and SHOULD achieve for you. 
If it succeeds, you think you LIKE 
the dream. 
If it should fail, you think the dream is sad. 
But whether 
it succeeds or fails is not its core, but just the flimsy covering. 


T 29 E 5. 
How happy would your dreams become, if you were NOT 
the one who gave the "proper" role to every figure that the dream 
contains. 
No-one can fail but your IDEA of him, and there IS no be¬ 
trayal but of this. 
The core of dreams the Holy Spirit gives is NEVER 
one of fear. 
The coverings may not appear to change, but what they 
MEAN has changed BECAUSE they cover something else. 
Percep¬ 
tions are determined by their purpose, in that they seem to BE what 
they are FOR. 
A shadow figure who attacks becomes a brother giv¬ 
ing you a chance to help, if this becomes the FUNCTION of the 
dream. 
And dreams of sadness thus are turned to joy. 


T 29 E 6. 
What is your brother FOR? You do not know, because 
YOUR function is obscure to you. 
Do NOT ascribe a role to him 
which you imagine would bring happiness to you. 
And do not try to 
hurt him, when he fails to take the part which you assigned to him 
in what you dream your life was meant to be. 
He asks for help in 
every dream he has, and you have Help to give him if you see the 
FUNCTION of the dream as He perceives its function. 
Who can util¬ 
ize all dreams as means to serve the Function given Him. 
Because 


919 


1-909 



Volume I Text 


He loves the dreamer, NOT the dream, each dream becomes an of¬ 
fering of love. 
For at its center is His Love for you, which lights 
WHATEVER form it takes with love. 
T(iooi) -8 15 938 

T 29 F. 
The Changeless Dwelling-Place (Notes 2006 12:141) 

T 29 F l. 
There is a place in you where this whole world has been for¬ 
gotten. 
Where no memory of sin and of illusion linger still. 
There is 
a place in you which time has left, and echoes of eternity are heard. 

There is a resting place so still no sound except a hymn to Heaven 
rises up to gladden God the Father and the Son. 
Where Both abide 
are They remembered Both. 
And where They are is Heaven and is 
peace. 
Think not that you can change Their dwelling place. 
For your 
Identity abides in Them, and where They are, forever must YOU be. 

T 29 F 2. 
The changelessness of Heaven is in you, so deep within that 
nothing in this world but passes by, unnoticed and unseen. 
The still 
infinity of endless peace surrounds you gently in its soft embrace, so 
strong and quiet, tranquil in the might of its Creator, nothing can 
intrude upon the sacred Son of God within. 
Here is the role the Holy 
Spirit gives to you who wait 939 upon the Son of God, and would be¬ 
hold him waken and be glad: 940 He is a part of you, and you of him, 
BECAUSE he is his Father's Son, and not for ANY purpose you may 
see in him. 
Nothing is asked of you but to ACCEPT the Changeless 
and Eternal that abide in him, for YOUR Identity is there. 


T 29 F 3. 
The peace in you CAN but be found in him. 
And every 
thought of love you offer him but brings you nearer to your waken¬ 
ing to peace eternal and to endless joy. 
This sacred Son of God is like 
yourself; the mirror of his Father's Love for you, the soft reminder of 
his Father's Love by which he was created, and which still abides in 
him, as It abides in you. 
Be very still, and hear God's Voice in him. 



938 April 25, 1968 

939 Urtext manuscript has it typed “look” this is crossed out and “wait” is typed in. 
The Notes also has it 
as “wait.” 

940 Obviously we can’t have both semicolon and colon, but the manuscript does. 
The Notes however 
has just a colon, so we’re viewing the semicolon preceding it as a typo and have removed it. 



1-910 


920 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


and let It tell you what his function is. 
941 He was created that YOU 
might be whole, for only the complete can be a part of God's Com¬ 
pletion, Which created you. 


T 29 F 4. 
There is no gift the Father asks of you but that you see in all 
creation but the shining glory of His Gift to you. 
Behold His Son, 

His perfect gift, in whom his Father shines forever, and to whom is 
all creation given as his own. 
942 T(l002) -816 BECAUSE he has it is it 
given you, and where it lies in him behold YOUR peace. 
The quiet 
that surrounds you dwells in him, and FROM this quiet come the 
happy dreams in which your hands are joined in innocence. 
These 
are not hands that grasp in dreams of pain. 
They hold no sword, for 
they have left their hold on every vain illusion of the world. 
And, 
being empty, they received instead a brother's hand in which com¬ 
pleteness lay. 


T 29 F 5. 
If you but knew the glorious goal that lies beyond forgive¬ 
ness, you would not keep hold on any thought, however light the 
touch of evil on it may appear to be. 
For you would understand how 
great the cost of holding anything God did not give in minds that 
can direct the hand to bless, and lead God's Son unto His Father's 
house. 
943 Would you not WANT to be a friend to him, created by 
his 944 Father as His home? If God esteems him worthy of Himself, 
would YOU attack him with the hands of hate? Who would lay 
bloody hands on Heaven itself, and hope to find its peace? Your 
brother thinks he holds the hand of death. 
Believe him not. 
But 
learn, instead, how blessed are you who can release him, just by of¬ 
fering him yours. 



1141 Psalm 46:10 Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth! 

942 John 19:5 Then Jesus came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. 
And Pilate said to 
them, “Behold the Man!” 

943 John 14:2 “In My Father’s house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. 
I go 
to prepare a place for you.” 

944 Urtext manuscript has it typed “His” it is crossed out and “his” is typed in. 
The previous instance of 
“Father” is preceded by a capitalized “His” with reference to the Son also. 
One of these is incorrect. 

The Notes is also erratic in capitalization here. 



921 


1-911 



Volume I Text 


T 29 F 6. 
A dream is given you in which he is your Savior, NOT your 
enemy in hate. 
A dream is given you in which you have forgiven 
him for all his dreams of death; a dream of hope you SHARE with 
him, instead of dreaming evil separate dreams of hate. 
Why does it 
seem so hard to share this dream? Because, unless the Holy Spirit 
gives the dream its function, it was made for hate, and will continue 
in death's services. 
Each form it takes in some way calls for death. 

And those who serve the lord of death have come to worship in a 
separated world, each with his tiny spear and rusted sword, to keep 
his ancient promises to die. 
T(1003) -817 

T 29 F 7. 
Such is the core of fear in every dream that has been kept 
apart from use by Him Who sees a different function for a dream. 

When dreams are SHARED, they lose the function of attack and 
separation, even though it was for this that every dream was made. 

Yet nothing in the world of dreams remains without the hope of 
change and betterment, for here is NOT where changelessness is 
found. 
Let us be glad indeed that this is so, and seek not the eternal 
in this world. 
Forgiving dreams are means to step aside from 
dreaming of a world OUTSIDE yourself. 
And leading finally beyond 
ALL dreams, unto the peace of everlasting life. 
T(l004) -818 945 

T 29 G. 
Forgiveness and Peace (Notes 201112:146) 

T 29 G 1 . 
How willing are you to forgive your brother? How much do 
you desire peace, instead of endless strife and misery and pain? 
These questions are the same, in different form. 
Forgiveness IS your 
peace, for herein lies the end of separation, and the dream of danger 
and destruction, sin and death; of madness and of murder, grief and 
loss. 
This is the "sacrifice" salvation asks, and gladly offers peace 
INSTEAD of this. 
Swear not to die, thou holy Son of God! You make 
a bargain that you cannot keep. 
The Son of Life cannot BE killed. 
He 
is immortal as his Father. 
What he is cannot be changed. 
He is the 
only thing in all the universe that MUST be One. 



May 6, 1968 


1-912 


922 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


T 29 G 2. 
What SEEMS eternal all will have an end. 
The stars will dis¬ 
appear, and night and day will be no more. 
All things that come and 
go , 946 the tides, the seasons, and the lives of man; all things that 
change with time and bloom and fade, will not return. 
Where time 
has set an end is not where the Eternal is. 
God's Son can never 
change by what men made of him. 
He will be as he was, and as he 
is, for time appointed not his destiny, nor sets the hour of his birth 
and death . 
947 Forgiveness will not change him. 
But time waits upon 
forgiveness, that the things of time may disappear because they 
have no use. 


T 29 G 3. 
Nothing survives its purpose. 
If it be conceived to die, then 
die it must, unless it does not take this purpose as its own. 
Change is 
the only thing that can be made a blessing here, where purpose is 
NOT fixed, however changeless it APPEARS to be. 
Think not that 
YOU can set a goal unlike God's Purpose FOR you, and establish it 
as changeless and eternal. 
You CAN give yourself a purpose that 
you do not have. 
But you can NOT remove the Power to change 
your mind, and see ANOTHER purpose there. 
Change is the gift of 
God He gave to all that YOU would make eternal, to ensure that 
ONLY Heaven would not pass away . 
948 T(l005) -819 

T 29 G 4. 
You were NOT born to die. 
You CANNOT change, because 
your Function HAS been fixed by God. 
All other goals are set in 
time, and change that time might be preserved, EXCEPTING ONE. 

Forgiveness does not aim at KEEPING time, but at its ending, when 
it has no use. 
Its purpose ended, it is gone. 
And where it once held 
seeming sway is now restored the Function God established for His 
Son in full awareness. 
Time can set no end to Its fulfillment, nor Its 
changelessness. 
There is no death, because the living share the Func¬ 
tion their Creator gave to them . 
949 Life's function CANNOT be to 


11 ' Originally there is a sentence break here, but handwritten mark-up makes it a comma break instead. 

The Notes also has a comma. 


947 Hebrews 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever. 


948 Matthew 24:35 “Heaven and earth will pass away, but My words will by no means pass away.” 

949 2 Timothy 1:10 But has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel, 


923 


1-913 



Volume I Text 


die. 
It must be life's EXTENSION, that it be as One forever and for¬ 
ever, WITHOUT end . 
950 

T 29 G 5. 
This world will bind your feet and tie your hands and kill 
your body, ONLY if you think that it was made to crucify God's 
Son . 
951 For even though it WAS a dream of death, you need not let it 
stand for this to you. 
Let THIS be changed, and nothing in the world 
but MUST be changed as well. 
For nothing here but is defined as 
what you see it FOR. 
How lovely is the world whose purpose is for¬ 
giveness of God's Son! How free from fear, how filled with blessing 
and with happiness! And what a joyous thing it is to dwell a little 
while in such a happy place! Nor CAN it be forgot, in such a world, 
it IS a little while 'til timelessness comes quietly to take the place of 
time. 
T(1006) -820 952 

T 29 H. 
The Lingering Illusion (Notes 2038 12:173) 

T 29 H l. 
Seek not outside yourself. 
For it will fail, and you will weep 
each time an idol falls. 
Heaven cannot be found where it is not, and 
there can be no peace EXCEPTING there. 
Each idol that you wor¬ 
ship when God calls will never answer in His place. 
There IS no 
other answer you can substitute, and find the happiness His Answer 
brings. 
Seek not outside yourself. 
For all your pain comes simply 
from a futile search for what you want, insisting WHERE it must be 
found. 
What if it is not there? Do you prefer that you be right or 
happy? Be you glad that you are told where happiness abides , 953 and 
seek no longer elsewhere. 
You will fail. 


T 29 H 2. 
But it is given you to know the truth, and NOT to seek for it 
outside yourself. 
No-one who comes here but must still have hope, 
some lingering illusion, or some dream that there is something 
OUTSIDE of himself that will bring happiness and peace to him. 
If 


950 This is reminiscent of the King James version of the benediction in Ephesians 3:21 “Unto him be 
glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end. 
Amen” 

951 John 11:44 And he who had died came out bound hand and foot with graveclothes, and his face was 
wrapped with a cloth. 
Jesus said to them, “Loose him, and let him go.” 

952 May 8, 1968 

953 Urtext manuscript has it typed “lies” the word “abides” is handwritten. 
The Notes has “abides.” 


1-914 


924 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


everything is IN him, this can not be so. 
And therefore, BY his com¬ 
ing, he denies the truth about himself, and seeks for something 
MORE than everything, as if a part of it were separated off, and 
found where all the REST of it is NOT. 
This is the purpose he be¬ 
stows upon the body; that it seek for what he lacks, and GIVE him 
what would make himself complete. 


T 29 H 3. 
And thus he wanders aimlessly about, in search of some¬ 
thing that he cannot find, believing him to be what he is not. 
The 
lingering illusion will impel him to seek out a thousand idols, and to 
seek beyond them for a thousand more. 
And each will fail him, all 
excepting one; for he will die, and does not understand the idol that 
he seeks IS but his death. 
Its FORM appears to be outside himself. 

Yet does he seek to kill God's Son within, and PROVE that he is vic¬ 
tor over him. 
This is the purpose EVERY idol has, for this the role 

that is assigned to it, and this the role that cannot BE fulfilled. 
T(1007) 
-821 

T 29 H 4. 
Whenever you attempt to reach a goal in which the body's 
betterment is cast as major beneficiary, you try to bring about your 
death. 
For you believe that you can suffer lack, and lack IS death. 
To 
sacrifice is to GIVE UP, and thus to be without, and to have suffered 
loss. 
And, BY this giving up is life renounced. 
Seek not outside 
yourself. 
The search implies you are not whole within, and fear to 
look upon your devastation, and prefer to seek outside yourself for 
what you are. 
Idols must fall BECAUSE they have no life, and what 
is lifeless IS a sign of death. 
You came to die, and what would you 
expect, but to PERCEIVE the signs of death you seek? 

T 29 H 5. 
No sadness and no suffering proclaims a message OTHER 
than an idol found, which represents a parody of life which, in its 
lifelessness, is really death, conceived as real and given living form. 

Yet each must fail and crumble and decay, because a form of death 
can not BE life, and what is sacrificed can not BE whole. 
All idols of 
this world were made to keep the truth within from being known to 
you, and to maintain allegiance to the dream that you must find 
what is OUTSIDE of you to be complete and happy. 
It is vain to 


925 


1-915 



Volume I Text 


worship idols in the hope of peace. 
God dwells within, and your 
completion lies in Him. 
No idol takes His place. 
Look not to idols. 

Do not seek outside yourself. 


T 29 H 6. 
Let us forget the purpose of the world the past has given it. 

For otherwise, the future WILL be like the past, and but a series of 
depressing dreams, in which all idols fail you, one by one, and you 
see death and disappointment everywhere. 
To change all this, and 
open up a road of hope and of release in what appeared to be an 
endless circle of despair, you need but to decide you do not KNOW 
the purpose of the world. 
You GIVE it goals it does not have, and 
thus do YOU decide what it is for. 
You try to see in it a place of 
idols, found outside yourself, with power to make complete what is 
within by splitting what you are BETWEEN the two. 
T(l008) -822 

T 29 H 7. 
You CHOOSE your dreams, for they are what you wish, 
perceived AS IF it had been given you. 
And idols do what you 
would have them do, and HAVE the power you ascribe to them. 

And you pursue them vainly in the dream, because you want their 
power as your own. 
Yet where ARE dreams, but in a mind asleep? 
And CAN a dream succeed in making real the pictures it projects 
outside itself? Save time, my brothers! 954 Learn what time is FOR. 

And speed the end of idols in the world made sad and sick by see¬ 
ing idols there. 
Your holy minds are altars unto God, and where He 
is NO idols can abide. 


T 29 H 8. 
The fear of God is but the fear of loss of idols. 
It is NOT the 
fear of loss of your reality. 
But YOU have made of your reality an 
idol, which you must protect AGAINST the light of truth. 
And all 
the world becomes the means by which this idol can be saved. 
Sal¬ 
vation thus appears to THREATEN life, and offer death. 
It is not so. 

Salvation seeks to prove there IS no death, and ONLY life exists. 
The 
sacrifice of death is NOTHING lost. 
An idol CANNOT take the 
place of God. 
Let Him remind you of His Love for you, and do not 


95: The Urtext manuscript has a comma here, but also capitalizes “Leam” indicating a sentence break 
was intended. 
The Notes has an exclamation point, which seems more likely to have been what was 
intended, so we’re replacing this comma with the original punctuation. 



1-916 


926 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


seek to drown His Voice in chants of deep despair to idols of your¬ 
self. 
Seek not outside your Father for your hope. 
For hope of happi¬ 
ness is NOT despair. 
T(l009) -823 955 

T 29 I. 
Christ and Anti-Christ (Notes 2015 12:150) 

T 29 11 . 
What is an idol? Do you think you know? For idols are un¬ 
recognized as such, and never seen for what they really are. 
That is 
the only power which they have. 
Their purpose is obscure, and they 
are feared, and worshipped, both, BECAUSE you do not know what 
they are for, and why they have been made. 
An idol is an image of 
your brother, which you would value MORE than what he IS. 
Idols 
are made that HE may be replaced, no matter what their form. 
And 
it is this which NEVER is perceived and recognized. 
Be it a body or 
a thing, a place, a situation or a circumstance, an object owned or 
wanted, or a right demanded or achieved, it is the same. 


T 2912 . 
Let not their form deceive you. 
Idols are but substitutes for 
your reality. 
In some way you believe they will complete your little 
self, and let you walk in safety in a world perceived as dangerous, 
with forces massed against your confidence and peace of mind. 


They have the power to supply your lacks, and add the value which 
you do not have. 
No-one believes in idols who has not enslaved 
himself to littleness and loss. 
And thus must seek BEYOND his little 
self for strength to raise his head and stand apart from all the misery 
the world reflects. 
This is the penalty for looking not within for cer¬ 
tainty, and 956 for a quiet calm which liberates you FROM the world, 
and lets you stand apart in quiet and in peace unlimited. 


T 2913. 
An idol is a false impression, or a false belief; some form of 
anti-Christ which constitutes a gap BETWEEN the Christ and what 
you see . 
957 An idol is a wish, made tangible and given form, and 


955 May 13, 1968 

956 The Urtext manuscript capitalizes the “A” in “and.” It’s not clear why there is a comma and a capital 
here but we’re calling it a typo. 


95 1 John 2:18 Little children, it is the last hour; and as you have heard that the Antichrist is coming, 
even now many antichrists have come, by which we know that it is the last hour. 


1 John 2:22 Who is a liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist who denies the 
Father and the Son. 



927 


1-917 



Volume I Text 


thus perceived as real, and seen OUTSIDE the mind. 
Yet they re¬ 
main ideas, and CANNOT leave the mind that is their source. 
Nor is 
their form apart from the idea it represents. 
All forms of anti-Christ 
oppose the Christ. 
And fall before His Face like a dark veil which 
SEEMS to shut you off from Him, alone in darkness. 
Yet the light is 
there. 
A cloud does not put out the sun. 
No more a veil can banish 

what it seems to separate, nor darken by one whit the Light Itself. 

T(1010) -824 

T 2914. 
This world of idols IS a veil across the Face of Christ BE¬ 
CAUSE its purpose is to separate your brother from yourself. 
A 
dark and fearful purpose, yet a thought without the power to 
change one blade of grass from something living to a sign of death. 

Its form is nowhere, for its source abides within your mind where 
God abideth not. 
Where IS this place, where What is everywhere has 
been excluded, and been kept apart? What hand could be held up to 
block God's way; whose voice could make demands He enter not? 
The "more-than-everything" is NOT a thing to make you tremble 
and to quail in fear. 
Christ's enemy is nowhere. 
He can take NO 
form in which he EVER will be real. 


T 2915. 
What is an idol? Nothing! It must be believed BEFORE it 
seems to come to life, and GIVEN power that it may be feared. 
Its 
life and power are its believer's gift, and this is what the miracle re¬ 
stores to what HAS life and power worthy of the gift of Heaven and 
eternal peace. 
The miracle does not restore the truth, the light the 
veil between has NOT put out. 
It merely LIFTS the veil, and LETS 
the truth shine unencumbered, being what It is. 
It does not NEED 
belief to be Itself, for It HAS BEEN created, so It IS. 
An idol is ES¬ 
TABLISHED by belief, and when it is withdrawn, the idol "dies." 

T 29 16 . 
This is the anti-Christ; the strange idea there is a power PAST 
omnipotence, a place BEYOND the infinite, a time transcending the 
eternal. 
Here the world of idols has been set by the idea this power 
and place and time are given form, and shape the world where the 
impossible has happened. 
Here the deathless come to die; the all- 
encompassing to suffer loss; the timeless to be made the slaves of 


1-918 


928 


Chapter 29 The Awakening 


time. 
Here does the changeless change; the peace of God, forever 
given to all living things, give way to chaos. 
And the Son of God, as 
perfect, sinless, and as loving as his Father, come to hate a little 
while; to suffer pain, and finally to die. 
T(ioil) -825 

T 29 I 7. 
WHERE is an idol? Nowhere! Can there be a gap in what is 
infinite, a place where time can INTERRUPT eternity? A place of 
darkness set where all is light, a dismal alcove separated off from 
what is endless, HAS no place to be. 
Am idol is beyond where God 
has set all things forever, and has left no room for anything EXCEPT 
His Will to be. 
Nothing and nowhere MUST an idol be, while God is 
everything and everywhere. 
What purpose has an idol, then? What 
is it FOR? This is the only question which has many answers, each 
depending on the one of whom the question has been asked. 


T 2918 . 
The world BELIEVES in idols. 
No-one comes unless he wor¬ 
shipped them, and still attempts to seek for one that yet might offer 
him a gift reality does NOT contain. 
Each worshipper of idols har¬ 
bors hope his SPECIAL deities will give him MORE than other men 
possess. 
It MUST be "more." It does not really matter more of what, 

- more beauty, more intelligence, more wealth; or even more afflic¬ 
tion and more pain. 
But MORE of SOMETHING is an idol FOR. 


Amd when one fails another takes its place, with hope of finding 
more of something ELSE. 
Be not deceived by forms the "something" 
takes. 
An idol is a means for getting MORE. 
And it is THIS that is 
against God's Will. 


T 29 19. 
God has not many sons, but only One. 
Who can have more, 
and who be given less? In Heaven would the Son of God but laugh, 
if idols could intrude upon his peace. 
It is for HIM the Holy Spirit 
speaks, and tells you 958 idols HAVE no purpose here . 
959 For MORE 
than Heaven can you never have. 
If Heaven is within why would 
you seek for idols which would make of Heaven less, to give you 
MORE than God bestowed upon your brother AND on you, as One 


958 Urtext manuscript has it typed “him” that is crossed out and “you” handwritten in. 
The Notes has the 
glyph most commonly used to mean ‘you.’ 

959 The word “here” is not originally present, it is handwritten in. 
It is also present in the Notes. 



929 


1-919 



Volume I Text 


with Him ? 960 God GAVE you all there is. 
And to be sure you could 
not lose it, did He ALSO give the same to every living thing as well. 

And thus IS every living thing a part of you as of Himself. 
No idol 
can establish you as MORE than God. 
But YOU will never be con¬ 
tent with being LESS. 
T(1012) -826 961 

T 29 J. 
The Forgiving Dream (Notes 2022 12:157) 

T 29 J l. 
The slave of idols is a WILLING slave. 
For willing he MUST 
be, to let himself bow down in worship to what has no life, and seek 
for power in the powerless . 
962 What happened to the holy Son of 
God, that this could BE his wish; to let himself fall lower than the 
stones upon the ground, and look to idols that they raise him up? 
Hear, then, your story in the dream you made, and ask yourself if it 
be not the truth that you believe that it is NOT a dream. 
A dream of 
judgment came into the mind that God created perfect as Himself. 

And in that dream was Heaven changed to hell, and God made en¬ 
emy unto His Son. 


T 29 J 2. 
How can His Son AWAKEN from the dream? It is a dream 
of judgment. 
So must he judge NOT, and he WILL waken. 
For the 
dream will seem to last while he is PART of it. 
Judge not, for he who 
judges WILL have need of idols, which will hold the judgment off 
from resting on himself . 
963 Nor CAN he know the Self he has con- 


960 Luke 17:21 Nor will they say, “See here!' or “See there!' For indeed, the kingdom of God is within 
you.” 

961 May 20, 1968 

962 Exodus 32:1-8 Now when the people saw that Moses delayed coming down from the mountain, the 
people gathered together to Aaron, and said to him, “Come, make us gods that shall go before us; for as 
for this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become 
of him.” And Aaron said to them, “Break off the golden earrings which are in the ears of your wives, 
your sons, and your daughters, and bring them to me.” So all the people broke off the golden earrings 
which were in their ears, and brought them to Aaron. 
And he received the gold from their hand, and he 
fashioned it with an engraving tool, and made a molded calf. 
Then they said, “This is your god, O 
Israel, that brought you out of the land of Egypt!” So when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it. 
And 
Aaron made a proclamation and said, “Tomorrow is a feast to the LORD.” Then they rose early on the 
next day, offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and drink, 
and rose up to play. 
And the LORD said to Moses, “Go, get down! For your people whom you brought 
out of the land of Egypt have corrupted themselves. 
They have turned aside quickly out of the way 
which I commanded them. 
They have made themselves a molded calf, and worshiped it and sacrificed 
to it, and said, “This is your god, O Israel, that brought you out of the land of Egypt!” 

963 Matthew 7:1 “Judge not, that you be not judged.” 


1-920 


930 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


demned. 
Judge not, because you make yourself a PART of evil 
dreams, where idols are your "true" identity, and your salvation 
from the judgment laid, in terror and in guilt, upon yourself. 
All 
figures in the dream are idols, made to save you FROM the dream. 

Yet they are PART of what they have been made to save you FROM. 

T 29 J 3. 
Thus does an idol KEEP the dream alive and terrible. 
For 
who would wish for one UNLESS he were in terror and despair? 
And this the idol REPRESENTS, and so its worship IS the worship 
of despair and terror, and the dream from which they come. 
Judg¬ 
ment is an INjustice to God's Son, and it IS justice that who judges 
HIM will not escape the penalty he laid upon HIMSELF within the 
dream he made . 
964 God knows of justice; NOT of penalty. 
But in the 
dream of judgment, you attack and ARE condemned. 
And WISH to 
be the slave of idols, who are interposed BETWEEN your judgment 
and the penalty it brings. 
T(1013) -827 

T 29 J 4. 
There CAN be no salvation in the dream, as YOU are dream¬ 
ing it. 
For idols MUST be part of it, to save you from what you be¬ 
lieve you have accomplished, and have done to make you sinful, 
and put out the Light within you. 
Little children. 
It is there. 
You do 
but dream, and idols are the toys you dream you play with. 
Who 
has need of toys but children? They pretend they rule the world, 
and give their toys the power to move about, and talk and think and 
feel, and speak for them. 
Yet everything their toys appear to do is in 
the minds of those who play with them. 
But they are eager to forget 
that they made up the dream in which their toys are real, and rec¬ 
ognize their wishes are their own. 


T 29 J 5. 
Nightmares are childish dreams. 
Their toys have turned 
against the child who thought he made them real. 
Yet CAN a dream 
attack? Or CAN a toy grow large and dangerous and fierce and 
wild? This does the child believe BECAUSE he fears his thoughts, 
and gives them to his toys instead. 
And their reality becomes his 


" : Matthew 7:1-2 “Judge not, that ye be not judged. 
For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be 
judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you.” 


931 


1-921 



Volume I Text 


own, because they seem to SAVE him from his thoughts. 
Yet do 
they KEEP his thoughts alive and real, but seen OUTSIDE himself, 
where they can turn against him for his treachery to them. 
He thinks 
he NEEDS them that he may escape his thoughts, because he thinks 
the THOUGHTS are real. 
And so he makes of ANYTHING a toy, to 
make his world remain outside himself, and play that HE is but a 
part of it. 


T 29 J 6. 
There is a time when childhood should be passed and gone 
forever. 
Seek not to retain the toys of children. 
965 Put them all away, 
for you have need of them no more. 
The dream of judgment is a 
children's game, in which the child becomes the father, powerful, 
but with the little wisdom of the child. 
What hurts him is destroyed; 
what helps him, blessed. 
Except he judges this as does a child, who 
does not KNOW what hurts and what will heal. 
And bad things 
seem to happen, and he is afraid of all the chaos in a world he thinks 
is governed by the laws he made. 
Yet is the real world unaffected by 
the world he thinks is real. 
Nor have its laws been changed because 
he did not understand. 
T(1014) -828 

T 29 J 7. 
The real world still is but a dream. 
Except the figures have 
been changed. 
They are not seen as idols which betray. 
It is a dream 
in which no-one is used to substitute for something else, or inter¬ 
posed between the thoughts the mind conceives and what it sees. 

No-one is used for something he is not, for childish things have all 
been put away. 
And what was once a dream of judgment now has 
changed into a dream where all is joy, because that is the PURPOSE 
that it has. 
Only forgiving dreams can enter here, for time is almost 
over. 
And the forms which enter in the dreams are now perceived as 
brothers, not in judgment, but in love. 


T 29 J 8. 
Forgiving dreams have little need to last. 
They are not made 
to separate the mind from what it thinks. 
They do not seek to prove 
the dream is being dreamed by someone ELSE. 
And in these dreams 


965 1 Corinthians 13:11 When I was a child, I spoke as a child, i understood as a child, I thought as a 
child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things. 



1-922 


932 



Chapter 29 The Awakening 


a melody is heard which everyone remembers, though he has not 
heard it since before all time began. 
Forgiveness, once complete, 
brings timelessness so close the song of Heaven can be heard, not 
with the ears, but with the holiness that never left the altar which 
abides forever deep within the Son of God. 
And when he hears this 
song again, he knows he NEVER heard it not. 
And where IS time, 
when dreams of judgment have been put away? 

T 29 J 9. 
Whenever you feel fear in any form, - and you ARE fearful if 
you do not feel a deep content, a certainty of help, a calm assurance 
Heaven goes with you, - be sure you made an idol, and believe it 
will betray you. 
For, beneath your hope that it will save you, lie the 
guilt and pain of self-betrayal and uncertainty, so deep and bitter 
that the dream can not conceal completely all your sense of doom. 

Your self-betrayal MUST result in fear, and fear IS judgment, lead¬ 
ing surely to the frantic search for idols and for death. 
Forgiving 
dreams remind you that you live in safety, and have NOT attacked 
yourself. 
T(1015) -829 

T 29 J 10. 
So do your childish terrors melt away, and dreams become 
a sign that you have made a new beginning, NOT another try to 
worship idols, and to KEEP attack. 
Forgiving dreams are kind to 
everyone who figures in the dream. 
And so they bring the dreamer 
full release from dreams of fear. 
He does not fear his judgment, for 
he has judged no-one, nor has sought to be released THROUGH 
judgment from what judgment MUST impose. 
And all the while he 
is remembering what he forgot when judgment seemed to be the 
way to SAVE him from its penalty. 
T(1016) -830 


933 


1-923 


Volume I Text 


Chapter 30- The New Beginning 

T 30 A. 
Introduction (Notes 2029 12:164) 

T 30 A l. 
The 966 "new beginning" now becomes the focus of the cur¬ 
riculum. 
The goal is clear, but now you need specific methods for 
attaining it. 
The speed by which it can be reached depends on only 
this; your willingness to practice every step. 
Each one will help a 
little, every time it is attempted. 
And, together, they will lead you 
both from dreams of judgment to forgiving dreams, and out of pain 
and fear. 
They are not new to you, but they are more ideas than 
rules of thought to you as yet. 
So now we need to practice them 
awhile, until they are the rules by which you live. 
We seek to make 
them habits now, so you will have them ready, and for ANY need. 
967 

T 30 B. 
Rules for Decision (Notes 2029 12:164) 

T 30 B l. 
Decisions are continuous. 
You do not always know when 
you are making them. 
But, with a little practice in the ones you rec¬ 
ognize, a set begins to form which sees you through the rest. 
It is not 
wise to let yourself become preoccupied with every step you take. 

The proper set, adopted consciously each time you wake, will put 
you well ahead. 
And if you find resistance strong and dedication 
weak, you are not ready. 
DO NOT FIGHT YOURSELF. 
But think 
about the kind of day you want, and tell yourself there is a way by 
which this very day can happen just like that. 
Then try again to 
HAVE the day you want. 


T 30 B 2.1. 
The outlook starts with this: 

"Today I will make NO decisions by myself." 

This means that you are choosing NOT to be the judge of what to 
do. 
But it must ALSO mean you will not judge the situations where 
you will be called upon to make response. 
For if you judge them. 



966 May 22, 1968 

967 Urtext manuscript has it “needs” was typed, and the “s” was crossed out. 
The Notes appears to have 
“need” as singular also. 



1-924 


934 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


you HAVE set the rules for how you should react to them. 
And then 
ANOTHER answer cannot BUT produce confusion and uncertainty 
AND FEAR. 
This is your major problem now. 
You still make up 
your minds, and THEN decide to ask what you should do. 
And 
what you hear may not resolve the problem AS YOU SAW IT FIRST. 

This leads to T(1017) 831 fear, because it contradicts what you per¬ 
ceive, and so you feel attacked, 968 AND THEREFORE ANGRY. 


There are rules by which this will not happen. 
But it does occur, at 
first, to everyone who listens well. 


T 30 B 3. 
2. 
Throughout the day, at any time you think of it, and have 
a quiet moment for reflection, tell yourself again the kind of day you 
want; the feelings you would have, the things you WANT to hap¬ 
pen, and the things you WOULD experience. 
And say, 

"If I make no decisions by 969 myself 
This is the day that will be GIVEN me. 
" 97 ° 

These two procedures, practiced well, will serve to let you be di¬ 
rected WITHOUT fear, for opposition will not FIRST arise, and 
THEN become a problem in itself. 
But there will still be times when 
you have judged ALREADY. 
Now the answer will provoke attack, 
unless you quickly straighten out your mind to WANT an answer 
that will work. 
Be certain this has happened, if you feel yourself to 
be unwilling to sit by, and ask to have the answer GIVEN you. 
This 
means you HAVE decided by yourself, AND CANNOT SEE THE 
QUESTION. 
Now you need a quick restorative BEFORE you ask. 


T 30 B 4. 
3. 
Remember once again the day you want, and recognize 
that something has occurred which is not part of it. 
Then realize that 
you have asked a question by yourself, and MUST have set an an¬ 
swer in your terms. 
Then say, 

"I HAVE no question. 
I forgot what to decide." 


968 Urtext manuscript has a period here, which leaves the next phrase as a sentence fragment. 
We 
corrected it to a comma which is what is in the Notes. 


969 Urtext manuscript has “(for)” in brackets above “by” which is crossed out. 
The Notes has “for” 
originally written with “by” written in above. 


970 Urtext manuscript has no period here, only the quotation marks. 
The Notes has a period. 



935 


1-925 



Volume I Text 


This cancels out the terms which you have set, and lets the AN¬ 
SWER show you what the question MUST have really been. 
Try to 
observe this rule without delay DESPITE your opposition. 
For you 
have ALREADY gotten angry, and your fear of being answered in a 
different way from what YOUR version of the question asks will 
gain momentum until you believe the day you want is one in which 
you get YOUR answer to your question. 
And you will not get it, for 
it would destroy T(1018) -832 the day by robbing you of what you 
REALLY want. 
This can be very hard to realize, when once you 
have decided by yourself the rules which PROMISE you a happy 
day. 
But these decisions still can be undone, by simple methods 
which you CAN accept. 


T 30 B 5. 
4. 
If you are so unwilling to receive you cannot even let your 
QUESTION go, you can begin to change your mind with this: 

"At least I can decide I do not LIKE what I feel now." 

This much is obvious, and paves the way for the next easy step, 
which follows this. 


T 30 B 6. 
5. 
Having decided that you do not like the way you feel, 
what could be easier than to continue with - 
"And so I HOPE I have been wrong." 

This works AGAINST the sense of opposition, and reminds you that 
help is not being thrust upon you, but is something that you want 
and that you need BECAUSE you do not like the way you feel. 
This 
tiny opening will be enough to let you go ahead with just a few 
more steps you need to LET yourself be helped. 


T 30 B 7. 
6. 
Now you have reached the turning point, because it has 
occurred to you that YOU will gain, if what you have decided is 
NOT so. 
Until this point is reached, you will believe your happiness 
DEPENDS on being right. 
But this much reason have you now at¬ 
tained; YOU would be better off if you were WRONG. 
This tiny 
grain of wisdom will suffice to take you further. 
You are NOT co¬ 
erced, but merely hope to have a thing you WANT. 
And you can 
say in perfect honesty, 

"I WANT another way to look at this." 


1-926 


936 


Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


Now you have changed your mind about the day, and have RE¬ 
MEMBERED what you really want. 
Its PURPOSE has no longer 
been obscured by the insane belief you want it for the goal of being 
RIGHT when you are WRONG. 
This is the READINESS for ask¬ 
ing, 971 brought to your awareness, for you CANNOT be in conflict 
when you T(1019) -833 ask for what you want, and SEE that it is this 
for which you ask. 


T 30 B 8. 
7. 
This final step is but acknowledgment of LACK of opposi¬ 
tion to be helped. 
It is a statement of an open mind, not certain yet, 
but willing to be shown: 

"Perhaps there IS another way to look at this. 


What can I LOSE by asking?" 

Thus are you made ready for a question that makes sense, and so 
the ANSWER will make sense as well. 
Nor will you fight AGAINST 
it, for you see that it is YOU who will be helped by it. 


T 30 B 9. 
It MUST be clear that it is easier to have a happy day if you 
PREVENT unhappiness from entering at all. 
But this takes practice 
in the rules which will PROTECT you from the ravages of fear. 

When THIS has been achieved, the sorry dream of judgment has 
FOREVER been undone. 
But, meanwhile, you have need for practic¬ 
ing the rules for its undoing. 
Let us, then, consider once again the 
very first of the decisions which are offered here. 
We said you can 
begin a happy day with the determination NOT to make decisions 
by yourself. 
This SEEMS to be a free decision in itself. 
And yet, you 
CANNOT make decisions by yourself. 
The only question really is 
WITH WHAT you choose to make them. 
That is really all. 


T 30 B 10. 
The first rule, then, is not coercion, but a simple statement 
of a simple fact. 
You WILL not make decisions by yourself whatever 
you decide. 
For they are made with idols or with God. 
And you ask 
help of 972 Christ or anti-Christ, and which you choose WILL join 


1171 A comma is typed and so is a forward slash overtyped. 
We just kept the comma, which reflects the 
Notes. 


972 The word “the” or “their” is typed in here and crossed out. 
The Notes contains no such extra word. 



937 


1-927 



Volume I Text 


with you, and tell you what to do . 
973 Your day is NOT at random. 
It 
is set by what you choose to live it WITH, and HOW the friend 
whose counsel you have sought perceives your happiness. 
You 
ALWAYS ask advice before you can decide ANYTHING. 
Let THIS 
be understood, and you can see there cannot BE coercion here, nor 
grounds for opposition that you may be free. 
There IS no freedom 
from what must occur. 
And if you think there is, you MUST be 
wrong. 
T(1020) -834 

T 30 B 11. 
The second rule as well is but a fact. 
For you and your ad¬ 
viser must AGREE on what you want BEFORE it can occur. 
It is but 
this AGREEMENT which permits all things to happen. 
NOTHING 
can be caused without some form of union, be it with a dream of 
judgment or the Voice for God. 
Decisions cause results BECAUSE 
they are not made in isolation. 
They are made by you and your ad¬ 
viser, for yourself, AND FOR THE WORLD AS WELL. 
The day you 
want you offer to the world, for it WILL be what you have asked 
for, and will reinforce the rule 974 of your adviser through the world. 

Whose kingdom is the world for you today ? 975 What kind of day 
will you decide to have? 

T 30 B 12. 
It needs but two who would have happiness this day to 
promise it to all the world. 
It needs but two to understand that they 
can not decide alone, to GUARANTEE the joy they asked for will be 
wholly shared. 
For they have understood the basic law which 
MAKES decision powerful, and gives it all effects that it will EVER 
have. 
It needs but two. 
These two ARE joined before there CAN be a 
decision. 
Let this be the ONE reminder that you keep in mind, and 
you will have the day you want, and give it to the world by having 
it yourselves. 
Your judgment has been LIFTED from the world by 


973 1 John 2:22 “Who is a liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist who denies the 
Father and the Son.” 

974 Urtext manuscript has it “rules” the “s” is crossed out by handwritten mark-up reflecting the form in 
the Notes. 


973 Matthew 6:24 “No one can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or 
else he will be loyal to the one and despise the other. 
You cannot serve God and mammon.” 


1-928 


938 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


your decision for a happy day. 
And as you have received so MUST 
you give . 
976 T(l02l) -835 

T 30 C. 
Freedom of Will (Notes 2045 12:180) 

T 30 C l. 
Do you not understand that to oppose the Holy Spirit IS to 
fight yourself? He tells you but YOUR will; He speaks for YOU. 
In 
HIS Divinity is but your own. 
And all He knows is but YOUR 
knowledge, saved for YOU, that you may do YOUR will through 
Him. 
God ASKS you do your will. 
He joins with YOU. 
He did not 
set His 977 kingdom up alone. 
And Heaven itself but represents your 
will, where everything created is for you. 
No spark of life but was 
created with your glad consent, as you would have it be. 
And not 
one Thought that God has ever had but waited for your blessing to 
be born. 
God is no enemy to you. 
He asks no more than that He hear 
you call Him Friend. 


T 30 C 2. 
How wonderful it is to do your will! For that IS freedom. 

There is nothing else that ever should be called by freedom's name. 

UNLESS you do your will, you are NOT free. 
And would God leave 
His Son WITHOUT what he has chosen for himself? God but en¬ 
sured that you would never LOSE your will, when He gave you His 
perfect Answer. 
Hear It now, that you may be reminded of His 
Love, and learn YOUR will. 
God would not have His Son made 
prisoner to what he does not want. 
He JOINS with you in willing 
you be free. 
And to OPPOSE Him is to make a choice against 
YOURSELF, and choose that YOU be bound. 


T 30 c 3. 
Look once again upon your enemy, the one you chose to 
hate instead of love. 
For thus was hatred born into the world, and 
thus the rule of fear established here. 
Now hear God speak to you 
through Him Who is His Voice, and YOURS as well, reminding you 
that it is NOT your will to hate, and be a prisoner to fear, a slave to 
death, a LITTLE creature with a LITTLE life. 
Your will is boundless; 


976 Matthew 10:8 “Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out demons. 
Freely you have 
received, freely give.” 

977 In the Urtext manuscript it is lower case “his” but being a pronoun for God, was probably meant to 
be capitalized, as it is in the Notes. 



939 


1-929 



Volume I Text 


it is NOT your will that it be bound. 
What lies in you has joined 
with God Himself in all creation's birth. 
Remember Him Who has 
created you, and through YOUR will created everything. 
T(l022) -836 

T 30 C 4. 
Not one created thing but gives you thanks, for it is by your 
will that it was born. 
No light of Heaven shines except for you, for it 
was set in Heaven by your will. 
What cause have you for anger in a 
world which merely waits YOUR blessing to be free? If YOU be 
prisoner, then God Himself could not be free. 
For what is done to 
him whom God so loves is done to God Himself . 
978 Think not HE 
wills to bind you. 
Who has made you co-creator of the universe 
along with Him. 
He would but KEEP your will forever and forever 
limitless. 


T 30 C 5. 
The world awaits the freedom you will give, when you have 
recognized that YOU are free. 
But you will not forgive the world 
until you have forgiven Him Who GAVE your will to you. 
For it is 
BY your will the world is given freedom. 
Nor can YOU be free 
APART from Him Whose holy Will you share. 
God turns to YOU to 
ask the world be saved, for 979 by your OWN salvation is it healed. 

And no-one walks upon the earth but must depend on YOUR deci¬ 
sion, that he learn death HAS no power over him because he shares 
YOUR freedom, as he shares your will. 
It IS your will to heal him, 
and because you have decided WITH him, he is healed. 
And now is 
God forgiven, for you chose to look upon your brother as a friend. 

T(1023) -837 980 

T 30 D. 
Beyond All Idols (Notes 2050 12:185) 

T 30 D l. 
Idols are quite specific. 
But your will is universal, being lim¬ 
itless. 
And so it has NO form, nor is content for its expression in the 
terms of form. 
Idols are LIMITS; they are the belief that there are 
FORMS which will bring happiness, and that, BY limiting, is all at- 


978 John 3:16 “For God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoever believes 
in Him should not perish but have everlasting life.” 

lJohn 4:11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another. 


979 A typed word is crossed out, it is illegible 

980 May 24, 1968 


1-930 


940 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


tained. 
It is as if you said, "I have no need of everything. 
This LIT¬ 
TLE thing I want, and it will BE as everything to me." And this 
MUST fail to satisfy, because it IS your will that everything be 
yours. 
Decide for idols, and you ask for LOSS. 
Decide for truth, and 
everything IS yours. 


T 30 D 2. 
IT IS NOT FORM YOU SEEK. 
What form can be a substitute 
for God the Father's Love? What form can take the place of all the 
love in the divinity of God the Son? What idol can make two of what 
IS one? And CAN the limitless be limited? You do not WANT an 
idol. 
It is NOT your will to have one. 
It will NOT bestow on you the 
gift you seek. 
When you decide upon the FORM of what you want, 
you LOSE the understanding of its purpose. 
So you see YOUR will 
within the idol, thus reducing it to a SPECIFIC form. 
But this could 
never BE your will, because what shares in all creation CANNOT be 
content with SMALL ideas and LITTLE things. 


T 30 D 3. 
Behind the search for EVERY idol lies the yearning for com¬ 
pletion. 
Wholeness has no form BECAUSE it is unlimited. 
To seek a 
special person or a thing to ADD to you to make yourself complete, 
can ONLY mean that you believe some FORM is missing. 
And, by 
finding THIS, you will achieve completion in a FORM you like. 
This 
is the purpose of an idol; that you will not look BEYOND it, to the 
source of your belief that you ARE incomplete. 
ONLY if you had 
sinned could this be so. 
For sin is the IDEA you are alone, and sepa¬ 
rated OFF from what is whole. 
And thus it WOULD be necessary 
for the search for wholeness to be made BEYOND the boundaries of 
limits on yourself. 
T(1024) -838 

T 30 D 4. 
It NEVER is the idol that you want. 
But what you think it 
OFFERS you, you want indeed, and have the RIGHT to ask for. 
Nor 
could it be POSSIBLE it be denied. 
Your will to be complete IS but 
God's will, and this is given you BY being His. 
God knows not form. 

He CANNOT answer you in terms which have no meaning. 
And 
YOUR will could not BE satisfied with empty forms, made but to fill 
a gap which is not there. 
It is not this you WANT. 
Creation gives no 
SEPARATE person and no SEPARATE thing the power to complete 


941 


1-931 


Volume I Text 


the Son of God. 
What idol CAN be called upon to give the Son of 
God what he already HAS? 

T 30 D 5. 
Completion is the FUNCTION of God's Son. 
He has no need 
to SEEK for it at all. 
Beyond ALL idols stands his holy will to be but 
what he IS. 
For MORE than whole is meaningless. 
If there were 
change in him; if he could be reduced to ANY form and limited to 
what is NOT in him, he would not BE as God created him. 
What 
idol CAN he need to be himself? For CAN he give a part of him 
away? What is not whole cannot MAKE whole. 
But what is REALLY 
asked for CANNOT be denied. 
Your will IS granted. 
NOT in any 
form that would content you not, but in the whole, completely 
lovely Thought God holds of you. 
T(l025) -839 981 

T 30 D 6. 
Nothing that God knows not exists. 
And what He knows 
exists forever, changelessly. 
For thoughts endure as long as does the 
mind that thought of them, and in the Mind of God there is no end¬ 
ing, nor a time in which His Thoughts were absent, or could suffer 
change. 
Thoughts are not born and cannot die. 
They share the at¬ 
tributes of their creator, nor have they a separate life, apart from 
him. 
The thoughts YOU think are in your mind, as you are in the 
Mind Which thought of you. 
And so there ARE no separate parts in 
what exists within God's Mind. 
It is forever One, eternally united 
and at peace. 


T 30 D 7. 
Thoughts SEEM to come and go. 
But all this means is that 
you are sometimes AWARE of them, and sometimes not. 
An unre¬ 
membered thought is born again too YOU when it returns to your 
awareness. 
Yet it did not die when you forgot it. 
It was ALWAYS 
there, but YOU were unaware of it. 
The Thought God holds of you 
is perfectly unchanged by your forgetting. 
It will ALWAYS be ex¬ 
actly as it was before the time when you forgot, and will be just the 
same when you remember. 
And it is the same WITHIN the interval 
when you forgot. 
The Thoughts of God are FAR beyond all change. 



May 27, 1968 


1-932 


942 




Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


and shine forever. 
They await not birth. 
They wait for welcome and 
remembering. 


T 30 D 8. 
The Thought God holds of you is like a star, unchangeable 
in an eternal sky. 
So high in Heaven is it set that those outside of 
Heaven know not it is there. 
But still and white and lovely will it 
shine through all eternity. 
There was no time it was not there. 
No 
instant when its light grew dimmer or less perfect ever was. 
Who 
knows the Father knows this light, for He is the eternal sky which 
holds it safe, forever lifted up and anchored sure. 
Its perfect purity 
does not depend on whether it is seen on earth or not. 
The sky em¬ 
braces it, and softly holds it in its perfect place, which is as far from 
earth as earth from Heaven. 
It is not the distance nor the time which 
keeps this star invisible to earth. 
But those who seek for idols CAN¬ 
NOT know this star is there. 
T(1026) -840 

T 30 D 9. 
Beyond all idols is the Thought God holds of you. 
Com¬ 
pletely unaffected by the turmoil and the terror of the world, the 
dreams of birth and death that here are dreamed, the myriad of 
forms that fear can take, quite undisturbed, the Thought God holds 
of you remains EXACTLY as It always was. 
Surrounded by a still¬ 
ness so complete no sound of battle comes remotely near. 
It rests in 
certainty and perfect peace. 
Here is your ONE reality kept safe, 
completely unaware of all the world that worships idols, and that 
knows not God. 
In perfect sureness of Its changelessness and of Its 
rest in Its eternal home, the Thought God holds of you has never left 
the Mind of Its Creator, Whom It knows as Its Creator knows that It 
is there. 


T 30 D to. 
Where could the Thought God holds of you EXIST but 
where you are? Is your reality a thing APART from you, and in a 
world which your reality knows NOTHING of? Outside you there 
IS no eternal sky, no changeless star, and NO reality. 
The Mind of 
Heaven's Son in Heaven is, for there the Mind of Father and of Son 
joined in creation which can HAVE no end. 
You have not two reali¬ 
ties, but One. 
Nor can you be AWARE of more than one. 
An idol OR 
the Thought God holds of you is your reality. 
Forget not, then, that 


943 


1-933 


Volume I Text 


idols MUST keep hidden what you are, NOT from the Mind of God, 
but from your own. 
The star shines still; the sky has never changed. 

But you, the holy Son of God Himself, are unaware of your reality. 

T(1027) -841 982 

T 30 E. 
The Truth Behind Illusions (Notes 2058 12:193) 

T 30 E l. 
You WILL attack what does not satisfy, and thus you will 
not see you made it up. 
You ALWAYS fight illusions. 
For the truth 
behind them is so lovely and so still in loving gentleness, were you 
AWARE of it, you would forget defensiveness entirely, and rush to 
its embrace. 
The truth could never BE attacked. 
And this you knew 
when you made idols. 
They were made that this might be forgotten. 

You attack but FALSE ideas, and NEVER truthful ones. 
All idols 
ARE the false ideas you made to fill the gap you think arose be¬ 
tween yourself and what is true. 
And you attack them for the things 
you think they REPRESENT. 
What lies BEYOND them cannot BE 
attacked. 


T 30 E 2. 
The wearying, dissatisfying gods you made are blown-up 
children's toys. 
A child IS frightened when a wooden head springs 
up as a closed box is opened suddenly. 
Or when a soft and silent 
wooly bear begins to squeak as he takes hold of it. 
The rules he 
made for boxes and for bears have failed him, and have broken his 
control of what surrounds him. 
And he is afraid because he thought 
the rules PROTECTED him. 
Now must he learn the boxes and the 
bears did NOT deceive him, broke no rules, nor mean his world is 
made chaotic and unsafe. 
HE WAS MISTAKEN. 
He misunderstood 
what MADE him safe, and thought that it had left. 


T 30 E 3. 
The gap that is not there is filled with toys in countless 
forms. 
And each one seems to break the rules you set for it. 
It never 
WAS the thing you thought. 
It MUST appear to break your rules for 
safety, since the RULES are wrong. 
But YOU are not endangered. 


You can laugh at popping heads and squeaking toys, as does the 
child who learns they are no threat to him. 
But while he likes to play 

982 May 31, 1968 


1-934 


944 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


with them, he still perceives them as obeying rules he made for his 
enjoyment. 
So there still are rules which they can seem to break, and 
frighten him. 
Yet IS he at the mercy of his toys? And CAN they rep¬ 
resent a threat to him? T(1028) -842 

T 30 E 4. 
Reality observes the laws of God, and NOT the rules you set. 

It is His laws which GUARANTEE your safety. 
All illusions that 
you believe about yourself obey NO laws. 
They seem to dance a lit¬ 
tle while, according to the rules you set for them. 
But then they fall, 
and cannot rise again. 
They are but toys, my children. 
Do not grieve 
for them. 
Their dancing never brought you joy, but neither were 
they things to frighten you, nor make you safe if they obeyed your 
rules. 
They must be neither cherished NOR attacked, but merely 
looked upon as children's toys, without a SINGLE meaning of their 
own. 
See ONE in them, and you will see them all. 
See NONE in 
them, and they will touch you not. 


T 30 E 5. 
Appearances deceive BECAUSE they are appearances, and 
not reality. 
Dwell not on them in ANY form. 
They but OBSCURE 
reality. 
And they bring fear BECAUSE they hide the truth. 
Do not 
attack what you have made to LET you be deceived. 
For thus you 
prove that you HAVE BEEN deceived. 
Attack HAS power to make 
illusions real. 
Yet what it makes is nothing. 
Who could be made 
fearful by a power that can have no REAL effects at all? What could 
it BE but an illusion, making things appear like to itself? Look 
calmly at its toys, and understand that they are idols which but 
dance to vain desires. 
Give them not your worship, for they are not 
there. 
But this is EQUALLY forgotten in attack. 


T 30 E 6. 
God's Son needs NO defense against his dreams. 
His idols 
do not threaten him at all. 
His ONE mistake is that he thinks them 
real. 
What can the power of illusions DO? Appearances can but de¬ 
ceive the mind that WANTS to be deceived. 
And you can make a 
simple choice that will forever place you far BEYOND deception . 
983 


983 Urtext manuscript has it typed “perception” handwritten mark-up changes it to “deception.” The 
Notes has it as “deception.” 


945 


1-935 



Volume I Text 


You need not concern yourself with HOW this will be done, for this 
you CANNOT understand. 
But you WILL understand that mighty 
changes have been quickly brought about, when you decide one 
very simple thing; you do not WANT whatever you believe an idol 
gives. 
For thus the Son of God declares that he is free of idols. 
And 
thus IS he free. 
T(l029) -843 

T 30 E 7. 
Salvation is a paradox indeed! What could it be EXCEPT a 
happy dream? For you are asked but to forgive all things that no- 
one ever did; to overlook what is not there; and not to look upon the 
unreal as reality. 
You are but asked to let your will be done, and 
seek no longer for the things you do not want. 
And you are asked to 
let yourself be free of all the dreams of what you never were, and 
seek no more to substitute the strength of idle wishes for the Will of 
God. 
Here does the dream of separation start to fade and disappear. 

For here the gap that is not there begins to be perceived without the 
toys of terror that you made. 


T 30 E 8. 
No more than this is asked. 
Be glad indeed salvation asks so 
little, NOT so much. 
It asks for NOTHING in reality. 
And even in 
illusions it but asks forgiveness be the substitute for fear. 
Such is the 
ONLY rule for happy dreams. 
The gap is emptied of the toys of fear, 
and then its unreality is plain. 
Dreams are for nothing. 
And the Son 
of God CAN have no need of them. 
They offer him no single thing 
that he could ever want. 
He is DELIVERED from illusions by his 
will, and but restored to what he IS. 
What could God's plan for his 
salvation BE, except a means to give him to Himself? T(l030) -844 984 

T 30 F. 
The Only Purpose (Notes 2064 12:199) 

T 30 F l. 
The real world is the state of mind in which the ONLY pur¬ 
pose of the world is seen to be forgiveness. 
Fear is NOT its goal, and 
the ESCAPE from guilt becomes its aim. 
The VALUE of forgiveness 
is perceived, and TAKES THE PLACE of idols, which are sought no 
longer, for their "gifts" are not held dear. 
No rules are idly set, and 
no demands are made of anyone or anything to twist and fit into the 


984 June 30, 1968 


1-936 


946 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


dream of fear. 
Instead, there is a wish to understand all things cre¬ 
ated as they really are. 
And it is recognized that all things must be 
FIRST forgiven, and THEN understood. 
Here, it is thought that un¬ 
derstanding is ACQUIRED by attack. 
There it is clear that BY attack 
is understanding LOST. 


T 30 F 2. 
The folly of pursuing guilt as GOAL is fully recognized. 
And 
idols are not wanted there, for guilt is recognized as the sole cause 
of pain in any form. 
No-one is tempted by its vain appeal, for suffer¬ 
ing and death have been perceived as things NOT wanted, and not 
striven FOR. 
The possibility of freedom has been grasped and wel¬ 
comed, and the means by which it can be gained can now be under¬ 
stood. 
The world becomes a place of hope, because its only purpose 
is to BE a place where hope of happiness can be fulfilled. 
And no- 
one stands outside this hope, because the world has been united in 
belief the purpose of the world is one which all must SHARE, if 
hope be more than just a dream. 


T 30 F 3. 
Not yet is Heaven quite remembered, for the purpose of for¬ 
giveness still remains. 
Yet everyone is certain he will go BEYOND 
forgiveness, and he but remains until it is made perfect in himself. 

He has no wish for anything but this. 
And fear has dropped away, 
because he is united in his purpose with HIMSELF. 
There is a hope 
of happiness in him so sure and constant he can barely stay, and 
wait a little longer with his feet still touching earth. 
Yet is he glad to 
wait 'til every hand is joined, and every heart made ready to arise 
and go with him. 
For thus is HE made ready for the step in which is 
all forgiveness left behind. 
T(l03l) -845 

T 30 F 4. 
The final step is God's, because it is but God Who could cre¬ 
ate a perfect Son, and share His Fatherhood with him. 
No-one out¬ 
side of Heaven knows how this can be. 
For understanding this is 
Heaven itself. 
Even the real world has a purpose still beneath crea¬ 
tion and eternity. 
But fear is gone, because its purpose is forgive¬ 
ness, NOT idolatry. 
And so is Heaven's Son prepared to be Himself, 
and to remember that the Son of God knows everything his Father 
understands, and understands it perfectly with Him. 
The real world 


947 


1-937 


Volume I Text 


still falls short of this, for this is God's Own Purpose; ONLY His, 
and yet completely shared and perfectly fulfilled. 


T 30 F 5. 
The real world is a state in which the mind has learned how 
easily do idols go when they are still perceived, but wanted not. 

How willingly the mind can let them go when it has understood 
that idols are nothing and nowhere, AND ARE PURPOSELESS. 
For 
only then can guilt and sin be seen WITHOUT a purpose, and as 
meaningless. 
Thus is the real world's purpose gently brought into 
awareness, to REPLACE the goal of sin and guilt. 
And all that stood 
BETWEEN your image of yourself and what you ARE forgiveness 
washes joyfully away. 
Yet God need not create His Son AGAIN, that 
what is his be given BACK to him. 
The gap between your brother 
and yourself was never there. 
And what the Son of God knew in 
creation he MUST know again. 


T 30 F 6. 
When brothers join in purpose in the world of fear, they 
stand ALREADY at the edge of the real world. 
Perhaps they still 
look back, and think they see an idol that they want. 
985 Yet has their 
path been surely set AWAY from idols toward reality, for when 
they joined their hands, it was Christ's hand they took. 
And they 
WILL look on Him Whose hand they hold. 
The face of Christ is 
looked upon BEFORE the Father is remembered. 
For He MUST be 
unremembered 'til His Son has reached BEYOND forgiveness to the 
Love of God. 
Yet is the love of Christ accepted first. 
And THEN will 
come the knowledge They are One. 
How light and easy is the step 
across the narrow boundaries of the world of fear, when you have 
RECOGNIZED Whose hand you hold! T(l032) -846 
T 30 F 7. 
Within your hand is everything you need to walk with per¬ 
fect confidence away from fear forever. 
986 And to go straight on, and 
quickly reach the gate of Heaven itself. 
For He Whose hand you 
hold was waiting but for you to join Him. 
Now that you have come. 



985 Luke 9:62 But Jesus said to him, “No one, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit 
for the kingdom of God.” 

986 Genesis 28:17 And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none other than the 
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!” 


1-938 


948 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


would HE delay in showing you the way that He must walk with 
you? His blessing lies on you as surely as His Father's Love rests 
upon Him. 
His gratitude to you is past your understanding, for you 
have enabled Him to rise from chains, and go with you TOGETHER 
to His Father's house. 
987 An ancient hate is passing from the world, 
and with it goes ALL hatred and ALL fear. 
Look back no longer, for 
what lies ahead is all you EVER wanted in your hearts. 


T 30 F 8. 
Give up the world! But NOT to sacrifice. 
You never 
WANTED it. 
What happiness have you sought here that did not 
bring you pain? What moment of content has not been bought at 
fearful price in coins of suffering? Joy HAS no cost. 
It is your sacred 
right. 
And what you pay for is NOT happiness. 
Be speeded on your 
way by honesty, and let not your experiences here deceive in retro¬ 
spect. 
They were NOT free from bitter cost and joyless consequence. 

Do not look back except in honesty. 
And when an idol tempts you, 
think of this; there never was a time an idol brought you ANY¬ 
THING except the "gift" of guilt. 
Not one was bought EXCEPT at 
cost of pain. 
Nor was it ever paid by you alone. 


T 30 F 9. 
Be merciful unto your brother, then. 
And do not choose an 
idol thoughtlessly, remembering that he will pay the cost as well as 
you. 
988 For HE will be delayed when you look back, and YOU will 
not perceive Whose hand you hold. 
Look forward, then, and walk in 
confidence, with happy hearts that beat in hope and do not pound 
in fear. 
The Will of God forever lies in those whose hands are joined. 

UNTIL they joined, they thought He was their enemy. 
But when 
they joined and SHARED a purpose, they were free to learn their 
will is one. 
And thus the Will of God MUST reach to their aware¬ 
ness. 
Nor can they forget for long that It is but their own. 
T(1033) -847 


987 John 14:2 “In My Father’s house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. 
I go 
to prepare a place for you.” 

988 Luke 6:36 “Therefore be merciful, just as your Father also is merciful.” 


949 


1-939 



Volume I Text 

T 30 G. 
The Justification for Forgiveness (Notes 2072 12:207) 

T 30 G l. 
Anger 989 is NEVER justified. 
Attack has NO foundation. 
It is 
here escape from fear begins, and will be made complete. 
Here is the 
real world given in exchange for dreams of terror. 
For it is on this 
forgiveness rests, AND IS BUT NATURAL. 
You are NOT asked to 
offer pardon where attack is due, and WOULD be justified. 
For this 
would mean that you forgive a sin by overlooking what is REALLY 
there. 
THIS IS NOT PARDON. 
For it would assume that, by re¬ 
sponding in a way which is NOT justified, your PARDON will be¬ 
come the answer to attack which HAS been made. 
And thus is par¬ 
don inappropriate, by being granted where it is NOT due. 


T 30 G 2. 
Pardon is ALWAYS justified, and has a sure foundation. 


You do NOT forgive the unforgivable, nor overlook a REAL attack 
that calls for punishment. 
Salvation does not lie in being asked to 
make unnatural responses, which are inappropriate to what is real. 

Instead, it merely asks that you respond appropriately to what is 
NOT real, by not perceiving what has not occurred. 
If pardon WERE 
unjustified, you WOULD be asked to sacrifice your rights when you 
return forgiveness for attack. 
But you are merely asked to see for¬ 
giveness as the NATURAL reaction to distress which rests on error, 
and thus calls for help. 
Forgiveness is the ONLY sane response. 
It 
KEEPS your rights from being lost to you. 


T 30 G 3. 
This understanding is the ONLY change that lets the real 
world rise to take the place of dreams of terror. 
Fear cannot ARISE 
unless attack is justified. 
And if it HAD a real foundation, pardon 
could have none. 
The real world is achieved when you perceive the 
basis of FORGIVENESS is quite real and fully justified. 
While you 
regard it as a gift unwarranted, it MUST uphold the guilt you would 
"forgive." Unjustified forgiveness IS attack. 
And this is all the world 
can ever give. 
It pardons "sinners" sometimes, but remains AWARE 
that they have sinned. 
And so they do not MERIT the forgiveness 
that it gives. 
T(1034) -848 


989 June 7, 1968 


1-940 


950 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


T 30 G 4. 
This is the false forgiveness which the world employs to 
KEEP the sense of 990 sin alive. 
And recognizing God is just, it seems 
impossible His pardon COULD be real. 
991 Thus is the fear of God the 
sure result of seeing pardon as unmerited. 
No-one who sees himself 
as guilty CAN avoid the fear of God. 
But he is SAVED from this di¬ 
lemma if HE can forgive. 
The mind MUST think of its Creator as it 
looks upon itself. 
If you can see your brother MERITS pardon, you 
have learned forgiveness is YOUR right, as much as his. 
Nor will 
you think that God intends for you a fearful judgment which your 
brother does not merit. 
For it is the truth that you CAN merit nei¬ 
ther more nor less than he. 
T(1035) -849" 2 

T 30 G 5. 
Forgiveness RECOGNIZED as merited will heal. 
It gives the 
miracle its strength to OVERLOOK illusions. 
This is how you learn 
that you must be forgiven too. 
There CAN be no appearance that 
can NOT be overlooked. 
For, if there were, it would be necessary 
FIRST there be some sin which stands BEYOND forgiveness. 
There 
would be an error that is MORE than a mistake; a special FORM of 
error, which remains unchangeable, eternal, and beyond correction 
or escape. 
There would be one mistake which had the power to 
UNDO creation, and to make a world which could REPLACE it and 
DESTROY the Will of God. 
Only if this were possible could there be 
SOME appearances which could withstand the miracle, and NOT be 
healed by it. 


T 30 G 6. 
There is no surer proof idolatry is what you wish than a be¬ 
lief there are some forms of sickness and of joylessness forgiveness 
CANNOT cure. 
This means that you prefer to keep SOME idols, and 


990 Urtext manuscript has it typed “senseless.” It is crossed out and handwriting changes it to “sense of’ 
which is what the Notes says. 


991 Isaiah 45:21 Tell and bring forth your case; 

Yes, let them take counsel together. 


Who has declared this from ancient time? 

Who has told it from that time? 

Have not I, the LORD? 

And there is no other God besides Me, 

A just God and a Savior; 

There is none besides Me. 


992 June 10, 1968 


951 


1-941 



Volume I Text 


are not prepared, as yet, to let ALL idols go. 
And thus you think that 
SOME appearances are real, and not appearances at all. 
Be not de¬ 
ceived about the MEANING of a fixed belief that SOME appear¬ 
ances are harder to look past than others are. 
It ALWAYS means 
you think forgiveness must be limited. 
And you have set a goal of 
partial pardon and a limited escape from guilt FOR YOU. 
What can 
this be, except a false forgiveness of YOURSELF, and everyone who 
seems APART from you? 

T 30 G 7. 
It MUST be true the miracle can heal ALL forms of sickness, 
or it CANNOT HEAL. 
Its purpose cannot be to judge which FORMS 
are real, and which APPEARANCES are true. 
If one appearance 
must remain APART from healing, one illusion must be part of 
truth. 
And you could NOT escape all guilt, but only SOME of it. 
You 
must forgive God's Son ENTIRELY. 
Or you will keep an image of 
yourself that is not whole, and will remain afraid to look within, and 
find escape from EVERY idol there. 
Salvation rests on faith there 
CANNOT be some forms of guilt which you can NOT forgive. 
And 
so there cannot be appearances which have replaced the truth about 
God's Son. 
T(1036) -850 

T 30 G 8. 
Look on your brother with the willingness to see him as he 
is. 
And do not keep a part of him outside your willingness that he 
be healed. 
To heal is to make whole. 
And what is whole can HAVE 
no missing parts that have been kept outside. 
Forgiveness rests on 
recognizing this, and being GLAD there cannot be some forms of 
sickness which the miracle must LACK the power to heal. 
God's Son 
is perfect, or he cannot be God's Son. 
Nor will you KNOW him, if 
you think he does not merit the escape from guilt in ALL its forms 
and ALL its consequence. 
There IS no way to think of him but this, if 
you would know the truth about yourself: 

"I thank you, Father, for your perfect Son, 

And in his glory will I see my own ." 993 


993 Matthew 11:25 At that time Jesus answered and said, "I thank You, Father, Lord of heaven and 
earth, that You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent and have revealed them to babes.” 


1-942 


952 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


T 30 G 9. 
Here is the joyful statement that there are NO forms of evil 
which can overcome the Will of God; the glad acknowledgment that 
guilt has NOT succeeded, by your wish, to make illusions real. 
And 
what is this, except a simple statement of the truth? Look on your 
brother with this hope in you, and you will understand he COULD 
not make an error that could change the truth in him. 
It is NOT dif¬ 
ficult to overlook mistakes that have been given no effects. 
But what 
you see as having power to make an idol of the Son of God, you will 
NOT pardon. 
For he has become to you a graven image, and a sign 
of death. 
994 Is THIS your Savior? Is his Father WRONG about His 
Son? Or have YOU been deceived in him who has been given you to 
heal for YOUR salvation and deliverance? T(l037) -85l 995 

T 30 H. 
The New Interpretation (Notes 2078 12:213) 

T 30 H l. 
Would God have left the meaning of the world to YOUR 
interpretation? If He had, it HAS no meaning. 
For it cannot be that 
meaning changes constantly, and yet is true. 
The Holy Spirit looks 
upon the world as with ONE purpose, changelessly established. 


And NO situation can affect its aim, but MUST be in accord with it. 

For ONLY if its aim could change with every situation could each 
one be OPEN to interpretation which is different every time you 
think of it. 
You ADD an element into the script you write for every 
minute in the day, and all that happens now means something else. 

You TAKE AWAY another element, and every meaning shifts ac¬ 
cordingly. 


T 30 H 2. 
What do your scripts reflect except your plans for what the 
day SHOULD be? And thus you judge disaster and success, ad¬ 
vance, retreat, and gain and loss. 
These judgments all are made ac- 


John 17:20-13 “Neither for these only do I pray, but for them also that believe on me through their 
word; that they may all be one; even as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in 
us: that the world may believe that thou didst send me. 
And the glory which thou hast given me I have 
given unto them; that they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be 
perfected into one; that the world may know that thou didst send me, and lovedst them, even as thou 
lovedst me.” 

994 Exodus 20:4 You shall not make for yourself a carved image—any likeness of anything that is in 
heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; 

995 June 13, 1968 


953 


1-943 



Volume I Text 


cording to the roles the script assigns. 
The fact they have no mean¬ 
ing in themselves is DEMONSTRATED by the ease with which 
these labels change with other judgments made on different aspects 
of experience. 
And then, in looking back, you think you see AN¬ 
OTHER meaning in what went before. 
What have you really done, 
except to show there WAS no meaning there? 996 And YOU assigned 
a meaning in the light of goals that change, with EVERY meaning 
shifting as they change. 


T 30 H 3. 
Only a CONSTANT purpose can endow events with stable 
meaning. 
But it must ACCORD ONE MEANING TO THEM ALL. 
If 
they are given DIFFERENT meanings, it MUST mean that they re¬ 
flect but different purposes, and this is ALL the meaning that they 
have. 
Can this BE meaning? Can confusion BE what meaning 
means? Perception CANNOT be in constant flux, and make allow¬ 
ance for stability of meaning ANYWHERE. 
Fear is a judgment 
NEVER justified. 
Its presence has no meaning but to show you 
wrote a fearful script, and are afraid accordingly. 
But NOT because 
the thing you fear has fearful meaning in itself. 
T(1038) -852 

T 30 H 4. 
A common purpose is the ONLY means whereby perception 
can be stabilized, and ONE interpretation given to the world and all 
experiences here. 
In this shared purpose is one meaning shared by 
everyone and everything you see. 
You do not have to judge, for you 
have learned one meaning has been GIVEN everything, and you are 
GLAD to see it everywhere. 
It cannot change BECAUSE you would 
perceive it everywhere, unchanged by circumstance. 
And so you 
OFFER it to all events, and LET them offer you stability. 
Escape 
from judgment simply lies in this; - All things have but one purpose, 
which you share with all the world. 
And nothing IN the world can 
BE opposed to it, for it belongs TO everything, as it belongs to you. 


T 30 H 5. 
In SINGLE purpose is the end of all ideas of sacrifice, which 
MUST assume a DIFFERENT purpose for the one who gains and 


' The question mark is not in the original Urtext manuscript, nor in the Notes. 
It is however, 
necessary since the sentence is a question. 



1-944 


954 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


him who loses. 
There could BE no thought of sacrifice apart from 
this idea. 
And it IS this idea of different goals which makes percep¬ 
tion shift and meaning change. 
In one united goal does this become 
impossible, for your AGREEMENT makes interpretation stabilize 
and last. 
How can communication REALLY be established, while 
the symbols which are used mean different things? The Holy Spirit's 
goal gives ONE interpretation, meaningful to you AND to your 
brother. 
Thus can you communicate with him, and he with you. 
In 
symbols which you BOTH can understand, the sacrifice of meaning 
is undone. 


T 30 H 6. 
All sacrifice entails the LOSS of your ability to see relation¬ 
ships AMONG events. 
And, looked at SEPARATELY, they HAVE 
no meaning. 
For there is no light by which they can be seen and un¬ 
derstood. 
They HAVE no purpose. 
And what they are FOR cannot 
BE seen. 
In any thought of loss there IS no meaning. 
No-one has 
agreed with you on what it means. 
It is a part of a distorted script, 
which cannot be interpreted with meaning. 
It must be forever unin¬ 
telligible. 
This is NOT communication. 
Your dark dreams are but 
the senseless, isolated scripts you write in sleep. 
Look not to sepa¬ 
rate dreams for meaning. 
ONLY dreams of pardon can be shared. 

They mean the same for BOTH of you. 
T(l039) -853 

T 30 H 7. 
Do not interpret out of solitude, for what you see means 
nothing. 
It will shift in what it stands for, and you will believe the 
world is an uncertain place, in which you walk in danger and uncer¬ 
tainty. 
It is but your INTERPRETATIONS which are lacking in sta¬ 
bility. 
And they are NOT in line with what you really are. 
This is a 
state so seemingly unsafe that fear MUST rise. 
Do not continue thus, 
my brothers. 
We have ONE Interpreter. 
997 And through His use of 
symbols are we joined, so that they mean the same to ALL of us. 


Our common language lets us speak to all our brothers, and to un- 

9,7 Urtext manuscript has it spelled “Interpreter” 


955 


1-945 



Volume I Text 


derstand with them forgiveness has been given to us all, and thus 
we CAN communicate again. 
T(l040) -854 998 

T 30 I. 
Changeless Reality (Notes 2083 12:218) 

T 30 11 . 
Appearances deceive BUT CAN BE CHANGED. 
Reality is 
changeless. 
It does not deceive at all. 
And if you fail to see BEYOND 
appearances, you ARE deceived. 
For everything you see will 
change, and yet you thought it real before, and now you think it real 
again. 
Reality is thus reduced to form, and CAPABLE of change. 

Reality is changeless. 
It is this that MAKES it real, and KEEPS it 
separate from all appearances. 
It MUST transcend all form to be it¬ 
self. 
It CANNOT change. 
The miracle is means to demonstrate that 
ALL appearances can change BECAUSE they are appearances, and 
CANNOT have the changelessness reality entails. 
The miracle at¬ 
tests salvation FROM appearances by SHOWING they can change. 


T 30 1 2 . 
Your brother has a changelessness in him beyond appearance 
and deception both. 
It is obscured by changing views of him which 
you PERCEIVE as his reality. 
The happy dream about him takes the 
form of the appearance of his perfect health; his perfect freedom 
from all forms of lack; and safety from disaster of all kinds. 
The 
miracle is proof he is not bound by loss or suffering in any form 
BECAUSE IT CAN SO EASILY BE CHANGED. 
This demonstrates 
that it was never real, and COULD not stem from his reality. 
For 
that is changeless, and has no effects which anything in Heaven or 
on earth could ever alter. 
But appearances are shown to be unreal 
BECAUSE they change. 


T 3013. 
What is temptation but a wish to make illusions real? It does 
not SEEM to be the wish that NO reality be so. 
But it IS an assertion 
that some FORMS of idols have a powerful appeal which makes 
them HARDER to resist than those you would not WANT to have 
reality. 
Temptation, then, is nothing more than this; - a prayer the 
miracle touch not some dreams, but KEEP their unreality obscure, 
and GIVE to them reality instead. 
And Heaven gives no answer to 


998 June 17, 1968 


1-946 


956 



Chapter 30 The New Beginning 


the prayer, nor CAN the miracle be given you to heal appearances 
you do not like. 
YOU HAVE ESTABLISHED LIMITS. 
What you ask 
IS given you, 999 but not of God Who knows no limits. 
YOU have lim¬ 
ited YOURSELF. 
T(1041) -855 

T 3014. 
Reality is changeless. 
Miracles but show what you have in¬ 
terposed BETWEEN reality and your awareness is unreal, and does 
not interfere at all. 
The cost of the belief there must be some appear¬ 
ances BEYOND the hope of change is that the miracle cannot come 
forth from you consistently. 
For you have ASKED it be withheld 
from power to heal all dreams. 
There is no miracle you cannot have 
when you DESIRE healing. 
But there is no miracle that CAN be 
given you UNLESS you want it. 
CHOOSE what you would heal, 
and He Who gives all miracles has not been given freedom to be¬ 
stow His gifts upon God's Son. 
When he is tempted, he DENIES re¬ 
ality. 
And he becomes the willing slave of what he chose instead. 


T 3015. 
BECAUSE reality is changeless is a miracle already there to 
heal all things that change, and offer them 1000 to you to see in happy 
form, devoid of fear. 
It WILL be given you to look upon your 
brother thus. 
But NOT while you would have it otherwise in some 
respects. 
For this but means you would not have him healed and 
whole. 
The Christ in him is perfect. 
Is it this that you would look 
upon? Then let there be no dreams about him that you would PRE¬ 
FER to seeing this. 
And you WILL see the Christ in him because you 
LET Him come to you. 
And when He has appeared to you, you will 
be certain you are like Him, for He is the changeless in your brother 
AND in you. 
1001 

T 30 16 . 
This will you look upon, when you decide there is not one 
appearance you would hold in place of what your brother really IS. 

Let no temptation to prefer a dream allow uncertainty to enter here. 



999 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened 
unto you:” 

1000 jj r f ext manuscript has “it” which is grammatically incorrect. 
Both the Notes and the HLC have 
“them” which appears correct. 


1001 1 John 3:2 Beloved, now we are children of God; and it has not yet been revealed what we shall be, 
but we know that when He is revealed, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. 



957 


1-947 



Volume I Text 


Be not made guilty and afraid when you are tempted by a dream of 
what he is. 
But do not give it power to REPLACE the changeless in 
him in your sight of him. 
There is no false appearance but will fade, 
if you request a miracle instead. 
There is no pain from which he is 
not free, if you would have him be but what he is. 
Why should you 
fear to see the Christ in him? You but behold yourself in what you 
see. 
As he is healed are YOU made free of guilt, and his appearance 
IS your own to you. 
T(l042) -856 1002 


1002 June 24, 1968 


1-948 


PROOF 


958 


COPY 



Volume I Text 


Chapter 31 - The Simplicity of Salvation 


Chapter 31 - The Simplicity of Salvation 

T 31 A. 
Introduction (Notes 2088 12:223) 

T 31A l. 
How simple is salvation! All it says is what was never true is 
not true now, and never will be. 
The impossible has NOT occurred, 
and CAN have no effects. 
And that is all. 
Can this BE hard to learn 
by anyone who WANTS it to be true? ONLY unwillingness to learn 
it could make such an easy lesson difficult. 
How hard is it to see that 
what is false can not be true, and what is true can not be false? You 
can no longer say that you perceive no differences in false and true. 

You have been told EXACTLY how to tell one from the other, and 
just what to do if you become confused. 
Why, then, do you persist 
in learning NOT such simple things? 

T 31A 2. 
There IS a reason. 
But confuse it not with difficulty in the 
simple things salvation asks you learn. 
It teaches but the very obvi¬ 
ous. 
It merely goes from one apparent lesson to the next, in easy 
steps which lead you gently from one to another, with no strain at 
all. 
This CANNOT be confusing, yet you ARE confused. 
For some¬ 
how you believe that what is TOTALLY confused is easier to learn 
and understand. 
What you have taught yourselves is such a giant 
learning feat it is indeed incredible. 
But you accomplished it because 
you wanted to, and did not pause in diligence to judge it hard to 
learn, or too complex to grasp. 


T 31 A 3. 
No-one who understands what you have learned, how care¬ 
fully you learned it, and the pains to which you went to practice and 
repeat the lessons endlessly, in every form you could conceive of 
them, could EVER doubt the power of your learning skill. 
There is 
no greater power in the world. 
The world was MADE by it, and 
even now depends on nothing else. 
The lessons you have taught 
yourselves have been so overlearned and fixed they rise like heavy 
curtains, to obscure the simple and the obvious. 
Say not you cannot 
learn them. 
For your power to learn is strong enough to teach you 


959 


1-949 


Volume I Text 


that your will is NOT your own; your thoughts do NOT belong to 
you; and even YOU are someone else. 
T(l043) -857 
T 31A 4. 
Who could maintain that lessons such as these are easy? Yet 
you have learned more than this. 
You have continued, taking every 
step, however difficult, without complaint, until a world was built 
that suited you. 
And every lesson that makes up the world arises 
from the first accomplishment of learning; an enormity so great the 
Holy Spirit's Voice seems small and still before its magnitude. 
1003 
The world began with one strange lesson, powerful enough to ren¬ 
der God forgotten, and His Son an alien to himself, in exile from the 
home where God Himself established him. 
You who have taught 
yourselves the Son of God is guilty, say not that you cannot learn 
the simple things salvation teaches you. 


T 31A 5. 
Learning is an ability you made, and gave yourselves. 
It was 
NOT made to do the Will of God, but to uphold a wish that It 
COULD be opposed, and that a will APART from It was yet more 
real than It. 
And this has learning sought to demonstrate, and you 
HAVE learned what it was made to teach. 
Now does your ancient 
overlearning stand implacable before the Voice of Truth, and teach 
you that Its lessons are not true; too hard to learn, too difficult to 
see, and too opposed to what is REALLY true. 
Yet you WILL learn 
them, for their learning is the ONLY purpose for your learning skill 
the Holy Spirit sees in all the world. 


T 31 A 6. 
His simple lessons in forgiveness have a power mightier 
than yours, because they call from God and from your Self to you. 
Is 
this a LITTLE Voice, so small and still It cannot rise above the sense¬ 
less noise of sounds which have no meaning? God willed not His 
Son forget Him. 
And the power of His Will is in the Voice That 
speaks for Him. 
Which lesson will you learn? Which outcome is in¬ 
evitable, sure as God, and far beyond all doubts or question? CAN it 


1003 1 Kings 19:12 And after the earthquake a fire, but the LORD was not in the fire; and after the fire a 
still small voice. 



1-950 


960 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


be your little learning, 1004 strange in outcome, and incredible in diffi¬ 
culty, will withstand the simple lessons being taught to you in every 
moment of each day, since time began and learning had been made? 
T(1044) -858 

T 31A 7. 
The lessons to be learned are only two. 
Each has its outcome 
in a different world. 
And each world follows surely from its source. 

The certain outcome of the lesson that God's Son is guilty is the 
world you see. 
It IS a world of terror and despair. 
Nor IS there hope 
of happiness in it. 
There IS no plan for safety you can make that ever 
will succeed. 
There IS no joy that you can seek for here, and hope to 
find. 
But this is NOT the only outcome which your learning can 
produce. 
However much you may have overlearned your chosen 
task, the lesson 1005 which reflects the Love of God is stronger still. 

And you WILL learn God's Son is innocent, and see ANOTHER 
world. 


T 31A 8. 
The outcome of the lesson that God's Son is guiltless is a 
world in which there is no fear, and everything is lit with hope, and 
sparkles with a gentle friendliness. 
Nothing but calls to you in soft 
appeal to be your friend, and let it join with you. 
And never does a 
call remain unheard, misunderstood, or left unanswered in the lan¬ 
guage in which the call itself was made. 
And you will understand it 
was THIS call that everyone and everything within the world has 
ALWAYS made. 
But YOU had not perceived it as it was. 
And now 
you see YOU were mistaken. 
You had been deceived by forms the 
call was hidden in. 
And so you did not hear it, and had lost a friend 
who ALWAYS wanted to be part of you. 


T 31A 9. 
The soft, eternal calling of each part of God's creation to the 
whole is heard throughout the world this second lesson brings. 

There is no living thing which does not share the universal will that 
it be whole, and that you do not leave its call unheard. 
Without your 
answer is it left to die, as it is saved from death when you have 


1004 In the Urtext manuscript a period appears here, but no capital on the next word. 
The Notes has a 
comma. 
We’re calling the period a typo. 


1005 The word “lessons” is originally typed, with the final s crossed out. 
HLC also omits the final s, as 
does the Notes. 



961 


1-951 



Volume I Text 


heard its 1006 calling as the ancient call to life, and understood that it 
is but your own. 
The Christ in you remembers God with all the cer¬ 
tainty with which He knows His Love. 
But ONLY if His Son is inno¬ 
cent can He BE Love. 
For God were fear indeed, if he whom He cre¬ 
ated innocent could be a slave to guilt. 
God's perfect Son remembers 

his creation. 
But in guilt he has forgotten what he really is. 
T(1045) - 
859 

T 31A 10 . 
The fear of God results as surely from the lesson that His 
Son is guilty as God's Love must be remembered when he 
LEARNS 1007 his innocence. 
For hate must father fear, and look upon 
its father as itself. 
How wrong are you who fail to hear the call that 
echoes past each seeming call to death, that sings behind each mur¬ 
derous attack, and pleads that love restore the dying world! You do 
not understand Who calls to you beyond each form of hate, each call 
to war. 
But you will recognize Him as you give Him answer in the 
language that He calls. 
He will appear when you have answered 
Him, and you will know in Him that God is Love. 
1008 
T 31A li. 
What is temptation but a wish to make the wrong decision 
on what you would learn, and have an outcome which you do not 
want? It is the RECOGNITION that it is a state of mind UN¬ 
WANTED that becomes the means whereby the choice is reassessed; 
another outcome seen to be preferred. 
You are deceived if you be¬ 
lieve you want disaster and disunity and pain. 
Hear not the call for 
this within yourself, but listen, rather, to the deeper call beyond it, 
that appeals for peace and joy. 
And all the world will GIVE you joy 
and peace. 
For as you hear you answer, and behold! - your answer is 


1006 Urtext manuscript has it typed “it”, it appears to have a handwritten “s” added. 
HLC also has the s, 
so does the Notes. 


1007 Urtext manuscript has it typed “remembers”, that is crossed out and “LEARNS” is handwritten in. 

That’s also the reading in the Notes. 
While the handwriten mark-up is in all caps, the word is not 
underlined in the Notes so it seems that the use of capitals in the mark-up is not intended to convey 
emphasis. 


1008 1 John 4:16 He who does not love does not know God, for God is love. 


1 John 4:8 And we have known and believed the love that God has for us. 
God is love, and he who 
abides in love abides in God, and God in him. 



1-952 


962 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


the proof of what you learned. 
Its outcome is the world you look 
upon. 
T(1046) -860 1009 

T 31A12. 
Let us be still an instant, 1010 and forget all things we ever 
learned, all thoughts we had, and every preconception that we hold 
of what things mean, and what their purpose is. 
Let us remember 
not our own ideas of what the world is for. 
We do not know. 
Let 
every image held of anyone be loosened from our minds and swept 
away. 
Be innocent of judgment, unaware of any thoughts of evil or 
of good that ever crossed your mind of anyone. 
Now do you know 
him not. 
But you ARE free to learn of him, and learn of him anew. 

Now is he born again to you, and you are born again to him, 1011 
WITHOUT the past that sentenced him to die, and you with him. 

Now is he free to live, as you are free, because an ancient learning 
passed away, and left a place for truth to be reborn. 


T 31 B. 
The Illusion of an Enemy (Notes 2097 12:232) 

T 31 B l. 
An ancient lesson is not overcome 1012 by the OPPOSING of 
the new and old. 
It is not VANQUISHED that the truth be known, 
or fought against to LOSE to truth's appeal. 
There is no battle which 
must be prepared, no time to be expended, and no plans that need 
be laid for bringing in the new. 
There IS an ancient battle being 
waged AGAINST the truth, but truth does not respond. 
Who 
COULD be hurt in such a war, unless he hurts himself? He HAS no 
enemy in truth. 
And CAN he be assailed by dreams? Let us review 
again what seems to stand BETWEEN you and the truth of what 
you are. 
For there are steps in its relinquishment. 
The first is a deci¬ 
sion which YOU make. 
But afterwards, the truth is GIVEN you. 


T 31 B 2. 
You would ESTABLISH truth. 
And by your wish, you set 
two choices to be made each time you think you must decide on 


1009 July 1, 1968 

1010 Psalm 46:10 Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth! 

1011 John 3:3 Jesus answered and said to him, “Most assuredly, I say to you, unless one is bom again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God.” 

1012 Urtext manuscript has it typed “over,” handwritten mark-up removes the comma and adds “come.” 
The Notes has “overcome.” 


963 


1-953 



Volume I Text 


anything. 
NEITHER is true. 
Nor ARE they different. 
Yet must we 
see them both, before you can look PAST them, to the ONE Alterna¬ 
tive that IS a different choice. 
But not in dreams you made, that this 
might be OBSCURED to you. 
What YOU would choose between is 
NOT a choice, and gives but the ILLUSION it is free, for it will have 
ONE outcome either way. 
Thus is it really not a choice at all. 
The 
leader and the follower emerge as SEPARATE roles, each seeming 
to possess advantages you would not want to lose. 
So in their fusion 
there appears to be the hope of satisfaction and of peace. 
T(l047) -861 

T 31 B 3. 
You see yourself divided into both these roles, forever split 
between the two. 
And every friend or enemy becomes a means to 
help you save yourself from this. 
Perhaps you call it love. 
Perhaps 
you think that it is murder justified at last. 
You hate the one you 
gave the leader's role when YOU would have it, and you hate as 
well his NOT assuming it, at times you want to let the follower in 
you arise, and give away the role of leadership. 
And this is what 
you made your brother FOR, and learned to think that this his pur¬ 
pose IS. 
Unless he serves it, he has not fulfilled the function that was 
given him by you. 
And thus he merits death, because he has no 
purpose and no usefulness to you. 


T 31 B 4. 
And what of him? What does he want of YOU? What 
COULD he want, but what you want of him? Herein is life as easily 
as death, for what you choose you choose as well for him. 
Two calls 
you make to him, as he to you. 
Between these two IS choice, because 
from them there IS a different outcome. 
If he be the leader or the fol¬ 
lower to you, it matters not, for you have chosen death. 
But if he 
calls for death or calls for life, for hate or for forgiveness and for 
help, is NOT the same in outcome. 
Hear the one, and you are sepa¬ 
rate from him, and are lost. 
But hear the other, and you join with 
him, and in your answer is salvation found. 


T 31 B 5. 
The voice you hear in him is but your own. 
What does he 
ask you for? And listen well. 
For he is asking what will come to you, 
because you see an image of yourself, and hear your voice request¬ 
ing what you want. 
Before you answer, pause to think of this: 


1-954 


964 


Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


The answer that I give my brother is 
What I am asking for. 
And what I learn 
Of him is what I learn about myself. 


Then let us wait an instant and be still, 1013 forgetting everything we 
thought we heard; remembering how much we do not know. 
This 
brother neither leads nor follows us, but walks beside us on the self¬ 
same road. 
He is like us, as near or far away from what we want as 
we will let him be. 
T(l048) -862 

T 31 B 6. 
We make no gains he does not make with us, and we fall 
back if he does not advance. 
Take not his hand in anger but in love, 
for in his progress do you count your own. 
And we go separately 
along the way unless you keep him safely by your side. 
BECAUSE 
he is your equal in God's Love will YOU be saved from all appear¬ 
ances, and answer to the Christ Who calls to you. 
Be still and listen. 

Think not ancient thoughts. 
Forget the dismal lessons that you 
learned about this Son of God who calls to you. 
Christ calls to all 
with EQUAL tenderness, seeing no leaders and no followers, and 
hearing but ONE Answer to them all. 
Because He hears one Voice, 
He cannot hear a DIFFERENT answer from the one He gave when 
God appointed Him His only Son. 


T 31 B 7. 
Be very still an instant. 
Come without all thought 1014 of what 
you ever learned before, and put aside all images you made. 
The old 
will fall away before the new, without your opposition or intent. 

There will be no attack upon the things you thought were precious, 
and in need of care. 
There will be no assault upon your wish to hear 
a call that never has been made. 
Nothing will hurt you in this holy 
place to which you come to listen silently, and learn the truth of 
what you really want. 
No more than this will you be asked to learn. 

But as you hear it, you will understand you need but come away 
WITHOUT the thoughts you did not want, and that were NEVER 
true. 



1013 Psalms 4:4 Stand in awe, and sin not: Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still, 

1014 Urtext manuscript has it typed "thoughts” and that is what is in the Notes. 



965 


1-955 



Volume I Text 


T 31 B 8. 
Forgive your brother ALL appearances, which are but an¬ 
cient lessons that you taught yourself about the sinfulness in you. 

Hear but his call for mercy and release from all the fearful images he 
holds of what HE is, and of what YOU must be. 
He is afraid to walk 
with you, and thinks perhaps a bit behind, a bit ahead, would be a 
safer place for him to be. 
Can YOU make progress if you think the 
same, advancing only when he would step back, and falling back 
when he would go ahead? For so 1015 do you forget the journey's goal 
which is but to decide to walk WITH him, so neither leads nor fol¬ 
lows. 
Thus it is a way you go together, NOT alone. 
And in THIS 
choice is learning's outcome changed, for Christ has been reborn to 
BOTH of you. 
T(1049) -863 

T 31 B 9. 
An instant spent without your old ideas of who your great 
Companion is and what he SHOULD be asking for, will be enough 
to let this happen. 
And you will perceive his purpose is the same as 
yours. 
He asks for what YOU want, and needs the SAME as you. 
It 
takes, perhaps, a different FORM in him, but it is NOT the form you 
answer to. 
He asks and YOU receive, for you have come with but 
ONE purpose; that you both may learn you love each other with a 
brother's love. 
And AS a brother, must his Father be the same as 
yours, as he is like yourself. 
Together is your joint inheritance re¬ 
membered and accepted by you both. 
Alone it is denied to both of 
you. 


T 31 B 10. 
Is it not clear that while you still insist on leading or on fol¬ 
lowing, you think you walk alone, with no-one by your side? This is 
the road to nowhere, for the light cannot be given while you walk 
alone, and so you cannot SEE which way you go. 
And so there IS 
confusion, and a sense of endless doubting, as you stagger back and 
forward in the darkness and alone. 
Yet are these but appearances of 
what the journey is, and how it must be made. 
For next to you is 
One Who holds the light before you, so that every step is made in 
certainty and sureness of the road. 
A blindfold can indeed obscure 

1015 The word “so” is not in the original, it is handwritten in. 
It is also present in the Notes. 



1-956 


966 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


your sight, but cannot make the way itself grow dark. 
And He Who 
travels with you HAS the Light. 
1016 T(1050) -864 

T 31 C. 
The Self-Accused (Notes 2105 12:240) 

T 31 C l. 
Only 1017 the self-accused condemn. 
As you prepare to make 
a choice that will result in DIFFERENT outcomes, there is first one 
thing that must be overlearned. 
It must become a habit of response 
so typical of everything you do, that it becomes your FIRST re¬ 
sponse to all temptation, and to every situation that occurs. 
Learn 
this, and learn it well, for it is here delay of happiness is shortened 
by a span of time you cannot realize. 
You NEVER hate your brother 
for HIS "sins", 1018 but ONLY for your own. 
Whatever form his sins 
appear to take, the form obscures the fact that you believe it to be 
yours, and THEREFORE meriting a just attack. 


T 31 C 2. 
Why should his sins BE sins, if you did not believe they 
could not be forgiven in you? Why are they real in him, if you did 
not believe that they are YOUR reality? And why do you attack 
them anywhere except you hate yourself? Are YOU a sin? You an¬ 
swer "yes" WHENEVER you attack, for BY attack do you assert that 
you are guilty, and must give as you deserve. 
And what CAN you 
deserve but what you ARE? If you did not believe that you DE¬ 
SERVED attack, it never would occur to you to GIVE attack to any¬ 
one at all. 
Why should you? What would be the gain to you? What 
could the outcome be that you would WANT? And how COULD 
murder bring you benefit? 

T 31 C 3. 
Sins are in bodies. 
They are not perceived in minds. 
They are 
not seen as purposes, but ACTIONS. 
Bodies act, and minds do not. 

And therefore must the body be at fault for what it does. 
It is not 
seen to be a passive thing, obeying your commands, and doing 
nothing of itself at all. 
If you are sin you ARE a body, for the mind 
acts not. 
And purpose must be in the body, NOT the mind. 
The 


1016 Original typed both lower and upper, overstruck. 
It does not appear capitalized in the Notes. 


1017 July 5, 1968 

1018 The quotation marks are handwritten in the Urtext manuscript. 
They are not present in the Notes. 



967 


1-957 



Volume I Text 


body must act on its own, and motivate itself. 
If you are sin, you 
lock the mind WITHIN the body, and you give its purpose to its 
prison house, which acts INSTEAD of it. 
A jailer does not follow or¬ 
ders, but ENFORCES orders on the prisoner. 
T(l05l) -865 

T 31 C 4. 
Yet is the BODY prisoner, and NOT the mind. 
The body 
thinks no thoughts. 
It has no power to learn, to pardon, or enslave. 


It gives no orders that the mind need serve, nor sets conditions that 
it must obey. 
It holds in prison but the willing mind 1019 that would 
abide in it. 
It sickens at the bidding of the mind that would become 
its prisoner. 
And it grows old and dies, because that mind is sick 
within ITSELF. 
Learning is all that causes change. 
And so the body, 
where no learning CAN occur, could never change unless the mind 
PREFERRED the body change in its appearances, to suit the purpose 
given by the mind. 
For it CAN learn, and there is ALL change made. 

T 31 C 5. 
The mind that thinks it is a sin has but ONE purpose; that 
the body be the source of sin, and KEEP it in the prison house it 
chose, and guards, and holds itself at bay, a sleeping prisoner to the 
snarling dogs of hate and evil, sickness and attack; of pain and age, 
of grief and suffering. 
Here are the thoughts of sacrifice preserved, 
for here guilt rules, and orders that the world be like itself; a place 
where nothing can find mercy, or survive the ravages of fear except 
in murder and in death. 
For here are you made sin, and sin can not 
abide the joyous nor accept the free, for they are enemies which sin 
must kill. 
In death is sin preserved, and those who think that they 
are sin MUST die for what they are. 


T 31 C 6. 
Let us be glad that you WILL see what you believe, and that 
it HAS been given you to CHANGE what you believe. 
The body 
will but follow. 
It can NEVER lead you where you would not be. 
IT 
does not guard your sleep, nor interfere with your awakening. 
Re¬ 
lease your body from imprisonment, and you will see no-one as 
prisoner to what you have escaped. 
You will not WANT to hold in 


1015 Urtext manuscript has a comma and forward slash overstuck appear here. 
It seems the intent was to 
cross out the comma which is not in the Notes. 



1-958 


968 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


guilt your chosen enemies, nor keep in chains to the illusion of a 
changing love the ones you think are friends. 
The innocent release in 
gratitude for THEIR release. 
And what they see upholds their free¬ 
dom FROM imprisonment and death. 
Open your mind to change, 
and there will be no ancient penalty exacted from your brother or 
yourself. 
For God has said there IS no sacrifice that can be asked; 
there IS no sacrifice that can be made. 
1020 T(1052) -866 

T 31 D, The Real Alternative (Notes 2109 12:245) 

T 31 D 1. 
There 1021 is a tendency to think the world can offer consola¬ 
tion and escape from problems that its purpose is to keep. 
Why 
should this be? Because it is a place where choice among illusions 
seems to be the ONLY choice. 
And YOU are in control of outcomes 
of your choosing. 
Thus you think, within the narrow band from 
birth to death, a little time is given you to use for you alone; a time 
when everyone conflicts with you, but you can choose which road 
will lead you out of conflict, and AWAY from difficulties which 
concern you not. 
But they ARE your concern. 
How, then, can you 
escape from them by leaving them behind? What MUST go with 
you, you will take with you whatever road you choose to walk 
along. 


T 31 D 2. 
Real choice is no illusion. 
But the world has none to offer. 

ALL its roads but lead to disappointment, nothingness and death. 

There IS no choice in its alternatives. 
Seek not ESCAPE from prob¬ 
lems here. 
The world was made that problems could not BE es¬ 
caped. 
Be not deceived by all the different names its roads are given. 

They have but one end. 
And each is but the means to GAIN that 
end, for it is here that all its roads will lead, however differently 
they seem to start; however differently they seem to go. 
Their end is 
certain, for there is no choice among them. 
All of them will lead to 


10:0 Hosea 6:6 For I desire mercy and not sacrifice, And the knowledge of God more than burnt 
offerings. 


Matthew 9:13 But go and learn what this means: “I desire mercy and not sacrifice. 
For I did not come 
to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance.” 

1021 July 16, 1968 


969 


1-959 



Volume I Text 


death. 
On some you travel gaily for a while, before the bleakness 
enters. 
And on some the thorns are felt at once. 
The choice is not 
WHAT will the ending be, but WHEN it comes. 


T 31 D 3. 
There IS no choice where every end is sure. 
Perhaps you 
would prefer to try them all, before you REALLY learn they are but 
one. 
The roads this world can offer seem to be quite large in num¬ 
ber, but the time must come when everyone begins to see how like 
they are to one another. 
Men have died on seeing this, because they 
saw no way EXCEPT the pathways offered by the world. 
And, 
learning THEY led nowhere, lost their hope. 
And yet this was the 
time they COULD have learned their greatest lesson. 
All must 1022 
reach this point, and go BEYOND it. 
It is true indeed there is no 
choice at all within the world. 
But this is NOT the lesson in itself. 

The lesson has a PURPOSE, and in THIS you come to understand 
what it is FOR. 
T(1053) -867 

T 31 D 4. 
Why would you seek to try another road, another person or 
another place, when you HAVE learned the way the lesson starts, 
but do not yet perceive what it is for? Its purpose is the ANSWER to 
the search that all must undertake who still believe there is another 
answer to be found. 
Learn now, WITHOUT despair, there is no 
hope of answers in the world. 
But do not judge the lesson which is 
but BEGUN with this. 
Seek not another signpost in the world which 
seems to point to still another road. 
No longer look for hope where 
there is none. 
Make fast your learning NOW, and understand you 
but waste time unless you go BEYOND what you have learned to 
what is yet to learn. 
For from this lowest point will learning lead to 
heights of happiness, in which you see the PURPOSE of the lesson 
shining clear, and perfectly within your learning grasp. 


T 31 D 5. 
Who would be willing to be turned AWAY from all the 
roadways of the world, UNLESS he understood their real futility? Is 
it not needful that he should BEGIN with this to seek another way 
instead? For while he sees a choice where there is none, what power 

1022 Urtext manuscript has it typed “much." It is “must” in the Notes. 



1-960 


970 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


of decision can he use? The great RELEASE of power must begin 
with learning where it really HAS a use. 
And what decision has 
power, if it be applied in situations without choice? The learning 
that the world can offer but ONE choice, no matter what its form 
may be, is the beginning of acceptance that there is a REAL alterna¬ 
tive instead. 
To fight AGAINST this step is to defeat your purpose 
here. 
You did not come to learn to find a road the world does not 
contain. 


T 31 D 6. 
The search for DIFFERENT pathways in the world is but the 
search for different FORMS of truth. 
And this would KEEP the truth 
from being reached. 
Think not that happiness is EVER found by fol¬ 
lowing a road AWAY from it. 
This makes NO sense, and CANNOT 
be the way. 
To you who seem to find this course to be too difficult to 
learn, let me repeat that, to achieve a goal, you must proceed in its 
direction, not AWAY from it. 
And EVERY road that goes the other 
way will NOT advance the purpose to be found. 
If THIS be difficult 
to understand, then IS this course impossible to learn. 
But only then. 

For otherwise, it is a simple teaching in the obvious. 
T(1054) -868 

T 31 D 7. 
There IS a choice which you have power to make, when you 
have seen the real alternatives. 
UNTIL that point is reached you 
HAVE no choice, and you can but decide how you would choose 
the better to deceive yourself again. 
This course attempts to teach no 
more than that the power of decision cannot lie in choosing different 
forms of what is still the SAME illusion and the SAME mistake. 
All 
choices in the world depend on this; - You choose BETWEEN your 
brother and yourself, and you will gain as much as he will lose, and 
what you lose is what is given him. 
How utterly OPPOSED to truth 
is this, when what the lesson's purpose is to teach that what your 
brother loses YOU have lost, and what he gains is what is given 
YOU. 


T 31 D 8. 
He has not left His Thoughts! But you forgot His Presence, 
and remember not His Love. 
No pathway in the world can lead to 
Him, nor any worldly goal is one with His. 
What road in all the 
world will lead within, when EVERY road was made to separate the 


971 


1-961 


Volume I Text 


journey and the purpose it MUST have, unless it be but futile wan¬ 
dering? All roads that lead AWAY from what you are will lead you 
to confusion and despair. 
Yet has He never left His Thoughts to die, 
without their Source forever in themselves. 
He has not left His 
Thoughts. 
He could no more depart from them than they could keep 
Him out. 
In unity with Him do they abide, and in their Oneness 
BOTH are kept complete. 


T 31 D 9. 
There IS no road that leads away from Him. 
A journey 
FROM yourself does not exist. 
How foolish and insane it is to think 
that there COULD be a road with such an aim. 
Where could it go? 
And how could you be made to travel on it, walking there without 
your own Reality at one with you? Forgive yourself your madness, 
and forget all senseless journeys and all goal-less aims. 
They have 
no meaning. 
You can NOT escape from what you are. 
For God IS 
merciful, and did not let HIS Son abandon Him. 
For what He is be 
thankful, for in that 1023 is YOUR escape from madness and from 
death. 
Nowhere but where He is can YOU be found. 
There IS no 
path that does not lead to Him. 
T(l055) -869 

T 31 E. 
Self-Concept versus Self (Notes 2117 12:252) 

T 31 E 1. 
The 1024 learning of the world is built upon a concept of the 
self adjusted to the world's reality. 
It fits it well. 
For this an image is 
that suits a world of shadows and illusions. 
Here it walks at home, 
where what it sees is one with it. 
The building of a concept of the 
self is what the learning of the world is FOR. 
This is its purpose; that 
you come WITHOUT a self, and MAKE one as you go along. 
And 
by the time you reach "maturity," you have perfected it to meet the 
world on equal terms, at one with its demands. 
A concept of the self 
is made by YOU. 
It bears NO likeness to yourself at all. 
It is an idol, 
made to take the place of your reality as Son of God. 


T 31E 2. 
The concept of the self the world would teach is not the 
thing that it appears to be. 
For it is made to serve two purposes, but 


1023 There is both a capital and a lower case “t” typed originally. 
The Notes does not capitalize it. 


1024 July 18, 1968 


1-962 


972 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


one of which the mind can recognize. 
The first presents the face of 
innocence, the aspect acted ON. 
It is this face that smiles and charms 
and even seems to love. 
It searches for companions, and it looks at 
times with pity on the suffering, and sometimes offers solace. 
It be¬ 
lieves that it is good, within an evil world. 
This aspect can grow an¬ 
gry, for the world is wicked, and unable to provide the love and 
shelter innocence deserves. 
And so this face is often wet with tears, 
at the injustices the world accords to those who would be generous 
and good. 


T 31 E 3. 
This aspect NEVER makes the first attack. 
But every day a 
hundred little things make small assaults upon its innocence, pro¬ 
voking it to irritation, and at last to open insult and abuse. 
The face 
of innocence the concept of the self so proudly wears can tolerate 
attack in self-defense, for is it not a well-known fact the world deals 
harshly with defenseless innocence? No-one who makes a picture of 
himself omits this face, for he has need of it. 
The other side he does 
not want to see. 
But it is here the learning of the world has set its 
sights. 
For it is here the world's reality is set, to see to it the idol 
lasts. 
T(1056) -870 

T 31E 4. 
Beneath the face of innocence there is a lesson that the con¬ 
cept of the self was made to teach. 
It is a lesson in a terrible dis¬ 
placement, and a fear so devastating that the face which smiles 
above it must forever look away, lest it perceive the treachery it 
hides. 
The lesson teaches this; "I am the thing you made of me, and 
as you look on me you stand condemned, because of what I am." On 
this conception of the self the world smiles with approval, for it 
guarantees the pathways of the world are safely kept, and those 
who walk on them will not escape. 


T 31 E 5. 
Here is the central lesson that ensures your brother is con¬ 
demned eternally. 
For what YOU are has now become his sin. 
For 
this is no forgiveness possible. 
No longer does it matter what he 
does, for your accusing finger points to him, unwavering and 
deadly in its aim. 
It points to you as well, but this is kept still deeper 
in the mists below the face of innocence. 
And in these shrouded 


973 


1-963 


Volume I Text 


vaults are all his sins and yours preserved, and kept in darkness, 
where they cannot be perceived as errors, which the light would 
surely show. 
You can be neither BLAMED for what you are, nor can 
you CHANGE the things it makes you do. 
And you are each the 
symbol of your sins to one another, silently, and yet with ceaseless 
urgency condemning still your brother for the hated thing you are. 


T 31 E 6. 
Concepts are learned. 
They are not natural. 
Apart from 
learning they do not exist. 
They are not given, and they must be 
made. 
Not one of them is true, and many come from feverish imagi¬ 
nations, hot with hatred and distortions born of fear. 
What is a con¬ 
cept but a thought to which its maker gives a meaning of his own? 
Concepts maintain the world. 
But they can NOT be used to demon¬ 
strate the world is real. 
For all of them are made WITHIN the world, 
born in its shadow, growing in its ways, and finally "maturing" in 
its thought. 
They are ideas of idols painted with the brushes of the 

world, which cannot make a single picture representing truth. 
T(1057) 
-871 

T 31E 7. 
A concept of the self is meaningless, for no-one here can see 
what it is for, and therefore cannot picture what it IS. 
Yet is all learn¬ 
ing that the world directs begun and ended with the single aim of 
teaching you this concept of yourself, that you will choose to follow 
this world's laws, and never seek to go BEYOND its roads, nor real¬ 
ize the way you see yourself. 
Now must the Holy Spirit find a way 
to help you see this concept of the self must be undone, if ANY 
peace of mind is to be given you. 
Nor can it be unlearned except by 
lessons aimed to teach that you are something else. 
For otherwise, 
you would be asked to make exchange of what you now believe for 
total loss of self. 
And greater terror would arise in you. 


T 31E 8. 
Thus are the Holy Spirit's lesson plans arranged in easy 
steps, that, though there be some lack of ease at times, and some dis¬ 
tress, there is no shattering of what was learned, but just a re¬ 
translation of what seems to be the evidence on its behalf. 
Let us 
consider, then, what proof there is that you are what your brother 
made of you. 
For even though you do not yet perceive that this is 


1-964 


974 


Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


what you think, you surely learned by now that you BEHAVE as if 
it were. 
Does he REACT for you? And did he know exactly what 
would happen? Could he see your future, and ordain before it came 
what you should do in EVERY circumstance? He must have made 
the world as well as you, to have such prescience in the things to 
come. 


T 31 E 9. 
That you are what your brother made of you seems most 
unlikely. 
Even if he did, who gave the face of innocence to you? Is 
this YOUR contribution? Who is, then, the "you" who made it? And 
who is deceived by all your goodness, and attacks it so? Let us for¬ 
get the concept's foolishness, and merely think of this; there are two 
parts to what you think yourself to be. 
If one was generated by your 
brother, who was there to make the other? And from whom must 
something be kept hidden? If the world be evil, there is still no need 
to hide what YOU are made of. 
Who is there to see? And what but is 
attacked could NEED defense? T(l058) -872 

T 31 E 10. 
Perhaps the reason why this concept must be kept in dark¬ 
ness is that, in the light, the one who would not think it true is YOU. 

And what would happen to the world you know, if all its underpin¬ 
nings were removed? Your concept of the world DEPENDS upon 
this concept of the self. 
And BOTH would go, if either one were ever 
raised to doubt. 
The Holy Spirit does not seek to throw you into 
panic. 
So He merely asks if just a LITTLE question might be raised. 

There ARE alternatives about the thing that you must be. 
You 
might, for instance, be the thing you chose to have your BROTHER 
be. 


T 31 E 11. 
This shifts the concept of the self from what is wholly pas¬ 
sive, and at least makes way for active choice, and some acknowl¬ 
edgment that interaction must have entered in. 
There is some un¬ 
derstanding that you chose for BOTH of you, and what he repre¬ 
sents has meaning that was given it by YOU. 
It also shows some 
glimmering of sight into perception's law that what you see reflects 
the state of the PERCEIVER's mind. 
Yet who was it that did the 
choosing first? If you are what you chose your brother be, alterna- 


975 


1-965 


Volume I Text 


tives were there to choose between, and someone must have first 
decided on the one to choose, and let the others go. 


T 31 E 12. 
Although this step has gains, it does not yet approach a ba¬ 
sic question. 
Something must have gone BEFORE these concepts of 
the self. 
And something must have done the learning which gave 
rise to them. 
Nor can this be explained by either view. 
The main ad¬ 
vantage of the shifting to the second from the first is that you some¬ 
how entered in the choice by YOUR decision. 
But this gain is paid in 
almost equal loss, for now YOU stand accused of guilt for what your 
BROTHER is. 
And you must SHARE his guilt, because you chose it 
FOR him, in the image of your own. 
While ONLY he was treacher¬ 
ous before, now must YOU be condemned along with him. 
T(1059) - 
873 

T 31E 13. 
The concept of the self has always been the great preoccu¬ 
pation of the world. 
And everyone believes that he must find the 
answer to the riddle of himself. 
Salvation can be seen as nothing 
more than the ESCAPE from concepts. 
It does not concern itself with 
content of the mind, but with the simple statement THAT IT 
THINKS. 
And what can think has choice, and CAN be shown that 
different thoughts have different consequence. 
And it can learn that 
EVERYTHING it thinks reflects the deep confusion that it feels 
about how it was made, and what it is. 
And vaguely does the con¬ 
cept of the self appear to answer what it does not know. 


T 31 E 14. 
Seek not your Self in symbols. 
There can be no concept that 
can stand for what you are. 
What matters it which concept you ac¬ 
cept, while you perceive a self which interacts with evil, and reacts 
to wicked things? Your concept of yourself will still remain quite 
meaningless. 
And you will not perceive that you can interact but 
with yourself. 
To see a guilty world is but the sign your learning has 
been guided by the world, and you behold it as you see yourself. 


The concept of the self embraces all you look upon, and NOTHING 
is outside of this perception. 
If you can be hurt by ANYTHING, you 
see a picture of your secret wishes. 
Nothing more than this. 
And in 


1-966 


976 


Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


your suffering of ANY kind, you see your own concealed desire to 
kill. 


T 31 E 15. 
You will make many concepts of the self as learning goes 
along. 
Each one will show the changes in your own relationships, as 
your perception of yourself is changed. 
There will be some confu¬ 
sion every time there is a shift, but be you thankful that the learning 
of the world is loosening its grasp upon your mind. 
And be you 
sure and happy in the confidence that it will go at last, and leave 
your mind at peace. 
The role of the accuser will appear in many 
places and in many forms, and each will seem to be accusing you. 

But have no fear it will not be undone. 
The world can teach no im¬ 
ages of you unless you WANT to learn them. 
There will come a time 
when images have all gone by, and you will see you know not what 
you are. 
T(l060) -874 

T 31 E 16. 
It is to this unsealed and open mind that truth returns, un¬ 
hindered and unbound. 
Where concepts of the self have been laid 
by is truth revealed exactly as it is. 
When every concept has been 
raised to doubt and question, and been recognized as made on NO 
assumptions that would stand the light, then is the truth left free to 
enter in its sanctuary clean and free of guilt. 
There is no statement 
that the world is more afraid to hear than this: 

"I do not know the thing I am, and THEREFORE do not know what I 
am doing, where I am, or how to look upon the world and on myself." 
Yet in this learning is salvation born. 
And what yon are will TELL yon 
Of Itself. 
T(1061) -875 

T 31 F. 
Recognizing the Spirit (Notes 2129 12:264) 

T 31 F l. 
You 1025 see the flesh or recognize the Spirit . 
1026 There is no 
compromise between the two. 
If one is real the other must be false, 
for what is real denies its opposite. 
There is no choice in vision but 
this one. 
What you decide in this determines all you see, and think 
is real, and hold as true. 
On this one choice does all your world de- 


1025 August 23, 1968 

1026 John 3:6 “That which is bom of the flesh is flesh, and that which is bom of the Spirit is spirit.” 


977 


1-967 



Volume I Text 


pend, for here have you established what you are, as flesh or Spirit 
in your own belief. 
If you choose flesh, you never will escape the 
body as your own reality, for you have chosen that you want it so. 

But choose the Spirit, 1027 and all Heaven bends to touch your eyes, 
and bless your holy sight, that you may see the world of flesh no 
more, except to heal and comfort and to bless. 


T 31 F 2. 
Salvation is undoing. 
If you choose to see the body, you be¬ 
hold a world of separation, unrelated things, and happenings that 
make no sense at all. 
This one appears and disappears in death. 
That 
one is doomed to suffering and loss. 
And no-one is exactly as he was 
an instant previous. 
Nor will he be the same as he is now an instant 
hence. 
Who could have trust where so much change is seen, for who 
is worthy if he be but dust? Salvation is undoing of all this. 
And 
constancy arises in the sight of those whose eyes salvation has re¬ 
leased from looking at the cost of keeping guilt, because they chose 
to let it go instead. 


T 31 F 3. 
Salvation does not ask that you behold the Spirit, and per¬ 
ceive the body not. 
It merely asks that this should be your CHOICE. 

For YOU can see the body WITHOUT help, but do not understand 
how to behold a world APART from it. 
It is your world salvation 
will undo, and LET you see another world your eyes could never 
find. 
Be not concerned HOW this could ever be. 
You do not under¬ 
stand how what YOU see arose to meet your sight. 
For if you did, it 
would be gone. 
The veil of ignorance is drawn across the evil and 
the good, and must be passed that both may disappear, so that per¬ 
ception finds no hiding place. 
T(1062) -876 

T 31 F 4. 
How is this done? It is not done at all. 
What COULD there 
be within the universe that God created that must still be done? 

Only in arrogance could you conceive that YOU must make the way 
to Heaven plain. 
The means are GIVEN you by which to see the 
world that will replace the one you made. 
Your will be done! In 


1027 In this paragraph and throughout this section “spirit” is originally typed with a lowercase “s” and 
the capitals are handwritten in numerous times. 



1-968 


978 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


Heaven as on earth this is forever true. 
1028 It matters not where you 
believe you are, or what you think the truth about yourself must 
really be. 
It makes no difference what you look upon, nor what you 
choose to feel or think or wish. 
For God Himself hath said, "Thy will 
be done." 1029 And it IS done to you accordingly. 


T 31 F 5. 
You who believe that you can choose to see the Son of God 
as you would have him be, forget not that no CONCEPT of yourself 
will stand against the truth of what you are. 
Undoing truth would 
be impossible. 
But concepts are not difficult to change. 
One vision, 
clearly seen, that does not fit the picture as it was perceived before, 
will change the world for eyes that learn to see BECAUSE THE 
CONCEPT OF THE SELF HAS CHANGED. 
Are YOU invulnerable? 
Then the world is harmless in your sight. 
Do YOU forgive? Then is 
the world forgiving, for you have forgiven it its trespasses. 
1030 And 
so it looks on you with eyes that see as yours. 


T 31 F 6. 
Are YOU a body? So is all the world perceived as treacher¬ 
ous, and out to kill. 
Are you a Spirit, deathless, and without the 
promise of corruption and the stain of sin upon you? So the world is 
seen as stable, fully worthy of your trust; a happy place to rest in for 
a while, where nothing need be feared but only loved. 
Who is un¬ 
welcome to the kind in heart? And what could hurt the truly inno¬ 
cent? Thy will be done, you holy Child of God. 
It does not matter if 
you think you are in earth or Heaven. 
What your Father wills for 
you can never change. 
The truth in you remains as radiant as a star, 
as pure as light, as innocent as Love Itself. 
And you ARE worthy 
that your Will 1031 be done. 
T(l063) -877 

1028 Matthew 6:10 “Thy kingdom come. 
Thy will be done, as in heaven, so on earth.” 

1029 ibid 

1030 Matthew 6:12 “And forgive us our trespasses, 

As we forgive our those who trespass against us.” 

1031 Urtext manuscript has it typed “will”, the capital is handwritten in reflecting the reading in the 
Notes. 



979 


1-969 



Volume I Text 

T 31 G. 
The Savior's Vision (Notes 2133 12:268) 

T 31 G l. 
Learning 1032 is change. 
Salvation does not seek to use a 
means as yet too alien to your thinking to be helpful, nor to make 
the kinds of change you could not recognize. 
Concepts are needed 
while perception lasts. 
And changing concepts IS salvation's task. 

For it must deal in contrasts, not in truth, which has no opposite and 
cannot change. 
In this world's concepts are the guilty "bad;" the 
"good" are innocent. 
And no-one here but holds a concept of him¬ 
self in which he counts the "good" to pardon him the "bad." Nor 
does he trust the "good" in anyone, believing that the "bad" must 
lurk behind. 


T 31 G 2. 
This concept emphasizes treachery, and trust becomes im¬ 
possible. 
Nor could it change while you perceive the "bad" in you. 

You could not recognize your "evil" thoughts as long as you see 
value in attack. 
You WILL perceive them sometimes, but will NOT 
see them as meaningless. 
And so they come in fearful form, with 
content still concealed, to shake your sorry concept of yourself, and 
blacken it with still another "crime." YOU cannot give yourself your 
innocence, for you are too confused about yourself. 
But should ONE 
brother dawn upon your sight as wholly worthy of forgiveness, then 
your concept of yourself IS wholly changed. 


T 31 G 3. 
YOUR "evil" thoughts have been forgiven with his, because 
you let them all effect YOU not. 
No longer did you choose that you 
should be the sign of "evil" and of guilt in him. 
And as you gave 
your trust to what is "good" in him, you gave it to the "good" 1033 in 
you. 
In terms of concepts, it is thus you see him MORE than just a 
body, for the "good" is NEVER what the body seems to be. 
The ac¬ 
tions of the body are perceived as coming from the "baser" part of 
you, and thus of him as well. 
By focusing upon the "good" in him, 
the body grows decreasingly persistent in your sight, and will at 


1032 August 26, 1968 

1033 A spurious period appears in the Urtext manuscript here. 



1-970 


980 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


length be seen as little more than just a shadow circling round the 
"good." T(1064) -878 

T 31 G 4. 
And this will be your concept of YOURSELF, when you 
have reached the world beyond the sight your eyes alone can offer 
you to see. 
For you will not interpret what you see without the Aid 
that God has given you. 
And in His sight there IS another world. 

You live in that world just as much as this, for BOTH are concepts of 
yourself, which can be interchanged, but never jointly held. 
The con¬ 
trast is far greater than you think, for you will love this concept of 
yourself, BECAUSE IT WAS NOT MADE FOR YOU ALONE. 
Born 
as a gift for someone NOT perceived to be yourself, it has been 
given YOU. 
For your forgiveness, offered unto him, has been ac¬ 
cepted now for BOTH of you. 


T 31 G 5. 
Have faith in him who walks with you, so that your fearful 
concept of yourself may change. 
And look upon the "good" in him, 
that you may not be fearful of your "evil" thoughts, because they do 
not cloud your view of him. 
And all this shift requires is that you be 
WILLING that this happy change occur. 
No more than this is asked. 

On its behalf, remember what the concept of yourself which now 
you hold has brought you in its wake, and welcome the glad con¬ 
trast offered you. 
Hold out your hand, that you may have the gift of 
kind forgiveness, which you offer one whose need for it is just the 
same 1034 as yours. 
And let your cruel concept of yourself be changed 
to one which brings the peace of God. 


T 31 G 6. 
The concept of yourself which now you hold would 
GUARANTEE your function here remain forever unaccomplished 
and undone. 
And thus it dooms you to a bitter sense of deep de¬ 
pression and futility. 
Yet it need not be fixed, unless you choose to 
hold it past the hope of change, and keep it static and concealed 
within your mind. 
Give it instead to Him Who understands the 
changes that it needs to let it SERVE the function given you to bring 


1034 Urtext manuscript has it typed “as great”, this is crossed out and “the same” typed in. 
The Notes 
appears to read “the same.” 


981 


1-971 



Volume I Text 


you peace, that you may offer peace to have it yours. 
Alternatives 
are in your mind to use, and you CAN see yourself another way. 

Would you not rather look upon yourself as NEEDED for salvation 
of the world, instead of as salvation's enemy? T(l065) -879 

T 31 G 7. 
The 1035 concept of the self stands like a shield, a silent barri¬ 
cade before the truth, and hides it from your sight. 
All things you 
see are images because you look on them as through a barrier which 
dims your sight and warps your vision, so that you behold nothing 
with clarity. 
1036 The light is kept from everything you see. 
At most, 
you glimpse a shadow of what lies beyond. 
At least you merely look 
on darkness, and perceive the terrified imaginings that come from 
guilty thoughts and concepts born of fear. 
And what you see is hell, 
for fear IS hell. 
All that is given you is for release; the sight, the vi¬ 
sion and the inner Guide all lead you OUT of hell, with those you 
love beside you, and the universe with them. 


T 31 G 8. 
Behold your role within the universe! To every part of true 
creation has the Lord of Love and Life entrusted ALL salvation from 
the misery of hell. 
And to each one has He allowed the grace to be a 
Savior to the holy ones especially entrusted to his care. 
And this he 
learns when first he looks upon ONE brother as he looks upon him¬ 
self, and sees the mirror of himself in him. 
Thus is the CONCEPT of 
himself laid by, for nothing stands BETWEEN his sight and what he 
looks upon, to judge what he beholds. 
And in this single vision does 
he see the Face of Christ, and understands he looks on everyone, as 
he beholds this One. 
For there is light where darkness was before, 
and now the veil is lifted from his sight. 


T 31 G 9. 
The veil across the Face of Christ, the fear of God and of sal¬ 
vation, and the love of guilt and death, - they all are different names 
for just ONE error; that there is a space between you and your 
brother, kept apart by an illusion of yourself which holds him off 
from you, and you away from him. 
The sword of judgment is the 


1035 Sept. 
30, 1968 

1036 1 Corinthians 13:12 For now we see in a glass darkly, but then face to face. 
Now I know in part, 
but then I shall know just as I also am known. 



1-972 


982 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


weapon which you give to the illusion of yourself, that it may fight 
to keep the space that holds your brother off unoccupied by love. 


Yet while you hold this sword you MUST perceive the body as 
YOURSELF, for you are bound to separation from the sight of him 
who holds the mirror to another view of what HE is, and thus what 
YOU must be. 
T(l066) -880 

T 31 G10. 
What is temptation but the WISH to stay in hell and mis¬ 
ery? And what could this give rise to BUT an image of yourself that 
CAN be miserable, and remain in hell and torment? Who has 
learned to see his brother NOT as this HAS saved himself, and thus 
IS he a savior to the rest. 
To everyone has God entrusted all, because 
a PARTIAL savior would be one who is but partly saved. 
The holy 
ones whom God has given each of you to save are everyone you 
meet or look upon, not knowing who they are; all those you saw an 
instant and forgot, and those you knew a long while since, and those 
you will yet meet, the unremembered and the not yet born. 
For God 
has given you His Son to save from every concept that he ever held. 

T 31 G ll. 
Yet while you wish to stay in hell, how COULD you be the 
savior of the Son of God? How would you know his holiness, while 
you see him apart from yours? For holiness is seen through holy 
eyes that look upon the innocence within, and thus EXPECT to see it 
everywhere. 
And so they call it forth in everyone they look upon, 
that he may be what they expect of him. 
This is the Savior's vi¬ 
sion; 1037 that he see HIS innocence in all he looks upon, and sees his 
own salvation everywhere. 
He holds NO concept of himself be¬ 
tween his calm and open eyes and what he sees. 
He BRINGS the 
light to what he looks upon, that he may see it as it really is. 


T 31 G12. 
Whatever form temptation seems to take, it ALWAYS but 
reflects a wish to be a self that you are not. 
And FROM that wish a 
concept rises, teaching you you ARE the thing you wish to be. 
It will 
remain your concept of yourself until the wish that fathered it no 
longer is held dear. 
And while you cherish it, you will behold your 


1037 Originally it appears to be both a colon and semi-colon. 
In the Notes it is a semi-colon. 



983 


1-973 



Volume I Text 


brother in the likeness of the self whose image has the wish begot of 
YOU. 
1038 For vision CAN but represent a wish, because it has NO 
power to create. 
Yet it can look with love or look with hate, depend¬ 
ing only on the simple choice of whether you would JOIN with 
what you see, or keep yourself apart and separate. 
T(l067) -881 
T 31 G 13. 
The Savior's vision is as innocent of what your brother is as 
it is free of any judgment made upon yourself. 
It sees no past in 
anyone at all. 
And thus it serves a wholly open mind, unclouded by 
old concepts and prepared to look on ONLY what the present holds. 

It cannot judge because it does not know. 
And RECOGNIZING this, 
it merely asks, "What is the meaning of what I behold?" Then is the 
Answer given, and the door held open for the Face of Christ to shine 
upon the one who asks in innocence to see BEYOND the veil of old 
ideas and ancient concepts held so long and dear AGAINST the vi¬ 
sion of the Christ in you. 
T(1068) -882 

T 31 G 14. 
Be vigilant against temptation, then, remembering that it is 
but a wish, insane and meaningless, to make yourself a thing which 
you are not. 
And think as well upon the thing that you would be 
instead. 
It is a thing of madness, pain, and death; a thing of treach¬ 
ery and black despair, of failing dreams and no remaining hope ex¬ 
cept to die and end the dream of fear. 
THIS is temptation; nothing 
MORE than this. 
CAN this be difficult to choose AGAINST? Con¬ 
sider what temptation is, and see the real alternatives you choose 
between. 
There ARE but two. 
Be not deceived by what appears as 
many choices. 
There is hell or Heaven . 
1039 And of these you choose 
but ONE. 


T 31 G 15. 
Let not the world's light, given unto you, be hidden from 
the world. 
It NEEDS the light, for it is dark indeed, and men 1040 de- 


10,8 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 


1039 Urtext manuscript has it typed as it stands, handwritten mark-up suggests a comma instead of a 
period. 
The Notes has it as it stands also. 


1040 Urtext manuscript has it typed “many” this is crossed out and “men” is written in. 
The Notes 
appears to read “that men” rather than either “and many” or “and men.” 


1-974 


984 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


spair because the Savior's vision is withheld, and what they see is 
death. 
Their Savior stands, unknowing and unknown, beholding 
them with eyes unopened. 
And THEY cannot see until he looks on 
them with seeing eyes, and offers them forgiveness with his own. 

Can you to whom God says, "Release My Son" be tempted NOT to 
listen, when you learn that it is YOU for whom He asks release? 

And what BUT this is what this course would teach? And what BUT 
this is there for you to learn? 

T 31 H Choose Once Again (Notes 2146 12:281) 

T 31 H l. 
Temptation has ONE lesson it would teach, in ALL its 
forms, WHEREVER it occurs. 
It would persuade the holy Son of 
God he is a body, born in what must die, unable to escape its frailty, 
and bound by what it orders him to feel. 
It sets the limits on what he 
can do; its power is the only strength he has; his grasp cannot ex¬ 
ceed its tiny reach. 
Would you BE this, if Christ appeared to you in 
all His glory, asking you but this, "Choose once again if you would 
take your place among the Saviors of the world, or would remain in 
hell, and hold your brothers there." For He HAS come, and He IS 
asking this. 
T(1069) -883 

T 31 H 2. 
How 1041 do you make the choice? How easily is this ex¬ 
plained! You ALWAYS choose between YOUR weakness and the 
strength of Christ in you. 
1042 And what you choose is what you think 
is real. 
Simply by never using weakness to direct your actions, you 
have given it no power. 
And the Light of Christ in you is given 
charge of everything you do. 
For you have brought your weakness 
unto Him, and He has given you His strength instead. 
Trials are but 
lessons which you failed to learn presented once again, so where 
you made a faulty choice before you now can make a better one, and 


1041 October 10, 1968 

1042 2 Corinthians 12:9 And He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made 
perfect in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of 
Christ may rest upon me. 


Philippians 4:13 I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. 



985 


1-975 



Volume I Text 


thus escape all pain which what you chose before has brought to 
you. 


T 31 H 3. 
In every difficulty, all distress, and each perplexity you face 
Christ calls to you, and gently says, "My brother, choose again." He 
would not leave one source of pain unhealed, nor any image left to 
veil the truth. 
He would remove all misery from you whom God 
created altars unto joy. 
He would not leave you comfortless, alone in 
dreams of hell, but would release your minds from everything that 
hides His Face from you. 
His holiness is yours because He is the 
ONLY power that is real in you. 
His strength is yours because He is 
the Self that God created as His ONLY Son. 
The images you make 
can not prevail against what God Himself would have you be. 


T 31 H 4. 
Be never fearful of temptation then, but see it as it is; another 
chance to choose again, and let Christ's strength prevail in every cir¬ 
cumstance and every place you raised an image of yourself before. 

For what appears to hide the Face of Christ is powerless before His 
Majesty, and disappears before His holy sight. 
The Saviors of the 
world, who see like Him, are merely those who chose His strength 
instead of their own weakness, seen APART from Him. 
They will 
redeem the world, for they are joined to all the power of the Will of 
God. 
And what they will is ONLY what He wills. 
T(1070) -884 

T 31 H 5. 
Learn, then, the happy habit of response to ALL temptation 
to perceive yourself as weak and miserable with these words: 

"I am as God created me. 
His Son 
can suffer nothing. 
And I AM His Son." 

Thus is Christ's strength INVITED to prevail, replacing all your 
weakness with the strength that comes from God, and that can 
NEVER fail. 
And thus are miracles as natural as fear and agony AP¬ 
PEARED to be before the choice for holiness was made. 
For IN that 
choice are false distinctions gone, illusory alternatives laid by, and 
nothing left to INTERFERE with truth. 


T 31 H 6. 
You ARE as God created you, and so is every living thing 
you look upon, REGARDLESS of the images you see. 
What you be- 


1-976 


986 


Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


hold as sickness and as pain, as weakness and as suffering and loss, 
is but temptation to perceive YOURSELF defenseless and in hell. 

Yield NOT to this, and you will see ALL pain in EVERY form 
WHEREVER it occurs but disappear as mists before the sun. 
A 
miracle has come to heal God's Son, and close the door upon his 
dreams of weakness, opening the way to his salvation and release. 

Choose once again what you would have him be, remembering that 
every choice you make establishes your own identity as you will see 
it, and believe it IS. 


T 31 H 7. 
Deny me not the little gift I ask, when in exchange I lay be¬ 
fore your feet the peace of God, and power to bring this peace to 
everyone who wanders in the world, uncertain, lonely, and in con¬ 
stant fear. 
For it is given you to JOIN with him, and through the 
Christ in you unveil his eyes, and let him look upon the Christ in 
him. 
My brothers in salvation, do not fail to hear my voice and listen 
to my words. 
I ask for nothing but your OWN release. 
There is no 
place for hell within a world whose loveliness can yet be so intense 
and so inclusive it is but a step from there to Heaven. 
To your tired 
eyes I bring a vision of a different world, so new and clean and fresh 
you will forget the pain and sorrow that you saw before. 
T(1071) -885 
T 31 H 8. 
But this a vision is which you must SHARE with everyone 
you see. 
For otherwise you will behold it not. 
To GIVE this gift is 
how to make it yours. 
And God ordained, in loving kindness, that it 
BE for you. 
Let us be glad that we can walk the world, and find so 
many chances to perceive another situation where His gift can 1043 
once again be recognized as ours. 
And thus will all the vestiges of 
hell, the secret sins and hidden hates be gone, and all the loveliness 
which they concealed appear like lawns of Heaven to our sight, to 
lift us high above the thorny roads we travelled 1044 on before the 
Christ appeared. 
1045 


1043 The word “can” is handwritten in. 


1044 Urtext manuscript has it typed “travel” the letters “led” are handwritten in. 
This corrects the 
manuscript to reflect the Notes. 


1045 Urtext manuscript has it typed “appears.” The letters “ed” are typed in. 
This corrects it to reflect the 
Notes. 



987 


1-977 



Volume I Text 


T 31 H 9. 
Hear me, 1046 my brothers, hear and join with me. 
God has 
ordained I cannot call in vain. 
And in His certainty I rest content. 


For you WILL hear, and you WILL choose again. 
And in this choice 
is everyone made free. 
I thank You, Father, for these holy ones who 
are my brothers as they are Your Sons. 
My faith in them is Yours. 
I 
am as sure that they will come to me as You are sure of what they 
are, and will forever be. 
They will accept the gift I offer 1047 them be¬ 
cause You gave it me on their behalf. 
And as I would but do Your 
holy Will, so will they choose. 
And I give thanks for them. 


T 31 H 10. 
Salvation's song will echo through the world with every 
choice they make. 
For we are one in purpose, and the end of hell is 
near. 
In joyous welcome is my hand outstretched to every brother 
who would join with me in reaching past temptation, and who looks 
with fixed determination toward the light that shines beyond in per¬ 
fect constancy. 
Give me my own, for they belong to You. 
And can 
You fail in what is but Your Will? I give You thanks for what my 
brothers are, and as each one elects to join with me, the song of 
thanks from earth to Heaven grows from tiny, scattered threads of 
melody to one inclusive chorus from a world redeemed from hell, 
and giving thanks to You. 
T(1072) -886 

T 31 H 11. 
And now we say "Amen." For Christ has come to dwell in 
the abode You set for Him before time was, in calm Eternity. 
The 
journey closes, ending at the place where it began. 
No trace of it re¬ 
mains. 
Not one illusion is accorded faith, and not one spot of dark¬ 
ness still remains to hide the Face of Christ from anyone. 
Thy Will is 
done, complete and perfectly, and all creation recognizes You and 
knows You as the only Source it has. 
Clear in Your Likeness does 
the Light shine forth from everything that lives and moves in 


1046 These few paragraphs have an uncanny resemblance to the parting speech of Jesus recorded in 
John’s gospel, chapter 14. 


1047 Urtext manuscript has it typed “the gift offered” but the handwritten mark-up changes it to “I offer” 
which is the same as the Notes. 



1-978 


988 



Chapter 31 The Simplicity of Salvation 


You. 
1048 For we have reached where all of us are One, and we ARE 
home where You would have us be. 



1048 Acts 17:28 for in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have 
said, “For we are also His offspring.” 


Proof update 1 November, 2009 


989 


1-979 


PROOF 


COPY 



990 

PROOF COPY 


PROOF 991 COPY 


992 

PROOF COPY 


Urtext Volume II: Workbook 


PROOF 


993 


COPY 


994 

PROOF COPY 


Volume II - Workbook 
Table of Contents 

Part 1.1 

Introduction (W1 InI).1 

Lesson 1 “Nothing I see in this room (on this street, from this window, in this 

place) means anything.”.3 

Lesson 2 “I have given everything I see in this room (on this street, from this 

window, in this place) all the meaning that it has for me.”.4 

Lesson 3 “I do not understand anything I see in this room (on this street, from 

this window, in this place).”.5 

Lesson 4 “These thoughts do not mean anything. 
They are like the things I see 

in this room (on this street, from this window, in this place).”.6 

Lesson 5 “I am never upset for the reason 1 think.”.8 

Lesson 6 “I am upset because I see something that is not there.”.10 

Lesson 7 “I see only the past.”.11 

Lesson 8 “My mind is preoccupied with past thoughts.”.13 

Lesson 9 “I see nothing as it is now.”.15 

Lesson 10 “My thoughts do not mean anything.”.17 

Lesson 11 “My meaningless thoughts are showing me a meaningless world.” 19 

Lesson 12 “I am upset because I see a meaningless world.”.20 

Lesson 13 “A meaningless world engenders fear.”.22 

Lesson 14 “God did not create a meaningless world.”.24 

Lesson 15 “My thoughts are images which I have made.”.26 

Lesson 16 “I have no neutral thoughts.”.28 

Lesson 17 “I see no neutral things.”.30 

Lesson 18 “I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my seeing.”.31 

Lesson 19 “I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my thoughts.”.32 

Lesson 20 “I am determined to see.”.34 

Lesson 21 “I am determined to see things differently.”.36 

Lesson 22 “What I see is a form of vengeance.”.37 

Lesson 23 “I can escape from the world I see by giving up attack thoughts.”. 
38 

Lesson 24 “I do not perceive my own best interests.”.40 

Lesson 25 “I do not know what anything is for.”.42 

Lesson 26 “My attack thoughts are attacking my invulnerability.”.44 

Lesson 27 “Above all else I want to see.”.46 

Lesson 28 “Above all else I want to see things differently.”.47 

Lesson 29 “God is in everything I see.”.49 

Lesson 30 “God is in everything I see because God is in my mind.”.51 

Lesson 31 “I am not the victim of the world I see.”.52 

Lesson 32 “I have invented the world I see.”.53 

Lesson 33 “There is another way of looking at the world.”.54 

Lesson 34 “I could see peace instead of this.”.55 

Lesson 35 “My mind is part of God's. 
I am very holy.”.57 

qq <5 II-iii 

PROOF COPY 





































Volume II - Workbook 

Table of Contents 


Lesson 36 “My holiness envelops everything I see.”.59 

Lesson 37 “My holiness blesses the world.”.60 

Lesson 38 “There is nothing my holiness cannot do.”.62 

Lesson 39 “My holiness is my salvation.”.64 

Lesson 40 “I am blessed as a Son of God.”.67 

Lesson 41 “God goes with me wherever I go.”.68 

Lesson 42 “God is my strength. 
Vision is His gift.”.70 

Lesson 43 “God is my Source. 
I cannot see apart from Him.”.72 

Lesson 44 “God is the Light in which I see.”.75 

Lesson 45 “God is the Mind with which I think.”.78 

Lesson 46 “God is the Love in which I forgive.”.80 

Lesson 47 “God is the Strength in which I trust.”.82 

Lesson 48 “There is nothing to fear.”.84 

Lesson 49 “God's Voice speaks to me all through the day.”.85 

Lesson 50 “I am sustained by the Love of God.”.87 

Review 1 (W 50 Rl).89 

Introduction.89 

Lesson 51 The review for today covers the following ideas: (1-5).91 

Lesson 52 Today's review covers these ideas: (6-10).93 

Lesson 53 Today we will review the following: (11-15).95 

Lesson 54 These are the review ideas for today: (16-20).97 

Lesson 55 Today's review includes the following: (21-25).99 

Lesson 56 Our review for today covers the following: (26-30). 
101 

Lesson 57 Today let us review these ideas: (31-35).103 

Lesson 58 These ideas are for review today: (36-40). 
105 

Lesson 59 The following ideas are for review today: (41-45).106 

Lesson 60 These ideas are for today's review. 
(46-50). 
107 

Lesson 61 “I am the light of the world.”.108 

Lesson 62 “Forgiveness is my function as the light of the world.”.110 

Lesson 63 “The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my 

forgiveness.”.112 

Lesson 64 “Let me not forget my function.”.113 

Lesson 65 “My only function is the one God gave me.”.115 

Lesson 66 “My happiness and my function are one.”.117 

Lesson 67 “Love created me like Itself.”.120 

Lesson 68 “Love holds no grievances.”.122 

Lesson 69 “My grievances hide the light of the world in me.”.125 

Lesson 70 “My salvation comes from me.”.128 

Lesson 71 “Only God's plan for salvation will work.”.131 

Lesson 72 “Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation.”.... 
134 

Lesson 73 “I will there be light.”.138 

Lesson 74 “There is no will but God's.”.141 


996 

PROOF COPY 










































Volume II - Workbook 
Table of Contents 

Lesson 75 “The light has come.”.143 

Lesson 76 “I am under no laws but God's”.146 

Lesson 77 “I am entitled to miracles.”.149 

Lesson 78 “Let miracles replace all grievances.”.151 

Lesson 79 “Let me recognize the problem so it can be solved.”.154 

Lesson 80 “Let me recognize my problems have been solved.”.157 

Review 2 (W 80 R2).159 

introduction.159 

Lesson 81 Our ideas for review today are: (61-62).161 

Lesson 82 We will review these ideas today: (63-64). 
162 

Lesson 83 Today let us review these ideas: (65-66). 
163 

Lesson 84 These are the ideas for today's review: (67-68). 
164 

Lesson 85 Today's review will cover these ideas: (69-70). 
165 

Lesson 86 These ideas are for review today: (71-72).166 

Lesson 87 Our review today will cover these ideas: (73-74). 
167 

Lesson 88 Today we will review these ideas: (75-76). 
168 

Lesson 89 These are our review ideas for today: (77-78). 
169 

Lesson 90 For this review we will use these ideas: (79-80). 
170 

Lesson 91 “Miracles are seen in light.”.171 

Lesson 92 “Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength are one.”.174 

Lesson 93 “Light and joy and peace abide in me.”.177 

Lesson 94 “I am as God created me.”.180 

Lesson 95 “I am One Self, united with My Creator.”.182 

Lesson 96 “Salvation comes from my One Self.”.186 

Lesson 97 “I am Spirit.”.189 

Lesson 98 “I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation.”.191 

Lesson 99 “Salvation is my only function here.”.194 

Lesson 100 “My part is essential to God's plan for salvation.”.197 

Lesson 101 “God's will for me is perfect happiness.”.200 

Lesson 102 “I share God's Will for happiness for me.”.202 

Lesson 103 “God, being Love, is also happiness.”.203 

Lesson 104 “I seek but what belongs to me in truth.”.204 

Lesson 105 “God's peace and joy are mine.”.206 

Lesson 106 “Let me be still and listen to the truth.”.208 

Lesson 107 “Truth will correct the errors in my mind.”.211 

Lesson 108 “To give and to receive are one in truth.”.214 

Lesson 109 “I rest in God.”.217 

Lesson 110 “I am as God created me.”.220 

Review 3 (W110 R3).222 

Introduction.222 

Lesson 111 For morning and evening review: (91-92).226 

Lesson 112 For morning and evening review: (93-94).227 

Lesson 113 For morning and evening review: (95-96).228 

997 II-v 

PROOF COPY 













































Volume II - Workbook 

Table of Contents 


Lesson 114 For morning and evening review: (97-98).229 

Lesson 115 For morning and evening review: (99-100).230 

Lesson 116 For morning and evening review: (101-102).231 

Lesson 117 For morning and evening review: (103-104).232 

Lesson 118 For morning and evening review: (105-106).233 

Lesson 119 For morning and evening review: (107-108).234 

Lesson 120 For morning and evening review: (109-110).235 

Lesson 121 “Forgiveness is the key to happiness.”.236 

Lesson 122 “Forgiveness offers everything I want.”.239 

Lesson 123 “I thank my Father for His gifts to me.”.242 

Lesson 124 “Let me remember I am one with God.”.244 

Lesson 125 “In quiet I receive God's Word today.”.247 

Lesson 126 “All that I give is given to myself.”.249 

Lesson 127 “There is no love but God's.”.252 

Lesson 128 “The world I see has nothing that I want.”.255 

Lesson 129 “Beyond this world there is a world I want.”.257 

Lesson 130 “It is impossible to see two worlds.”.259 

Lesson 131 “No-one can fail who asks to reach the truth.”.262 

Lesson 132 “I loose the world from all I thought it was.”.266 

Lesson 133 “I will not value what is valueless.”.270 

Lesson 134 “Let me perceive forgiveness as it is.”.274 

Lesson 135 “If I defend myself I am attacked.”.278 

Lesson 136 “Sickness is a defense against the truth.”.284 

Lesson 137 “When I am healed, I am not healed alone.”.289 

Lesson 138 “Heaven is the decision I must make.”.293 

Lesson 139 “I will accept Atonement for myself.”.296 

Lesson 140 “Only salvation can be said to cure.”.299 

Review 4 (W140 R4).303 

Introduction.303 

Lesson 141 “My mind holds only what I think with God.” (121-122).306 

Lesson 142 “My mind holds only what I think with God.” (123-124).307 

Lesson 143 “My mind holds only what I think with God.” (125-126).308 

Lesson 144 “My mind holds only what I think with God.” (127-128).309 

Lesson 145 “My mind holds only what I think with God.” (129-130).310 

Lesson 146 “My mind holds only what 1 think with God.” (131-132).311 

Lesson 147 “My mind holds only what 1 think with God.” (133-134). 
312 

Lesson 148 “My mind holds only what 1 think with God.” (135-136). 
313 

Lesson 149 “My mind holds only what 1 think with God.” (137-138). 
314 

Lesson 150 “My mind holds only what 1 think with God.” (139-140).315 

Lesson 151 “All things are echoes of the Voice of God.”.316 

Lesson 152 “The power of decision is my own.”.320 

Lesson 153 “In my defenselessness my safety lies.”.323 


998 

PROOF COPY 












































Volume II - Workbook 
Table of Contents 

Lesson 154 “I am among the ministers of God.”.328 

Lesson 155 “I will step back and let Him lead the way.”.332 

Lesson 156 “I walk with God in perfect holiness.”.336 

Lesson 157 “Into His Presence would I enter now.”.338 

Lesson 158 “Today I learn to give as I receive.”.340 

Lesson 159 “I give the miracles I have received.”.343 

Lesson 160 “I am at home. 
Fear is the stranger here.”.346 

Lesson 161 “Give me your blessing, holy Son of God.”.349 

Lesson 162 “I am as God created me.”.353 

Lesson 163 “There is no death. 
The Son of God is free.”.355 

Lesson 164 “Now are we One with Him Who is our Source.”.358 

Lesson 165 “Let not my mind deny the Thought of God.”.361 

Lesson 166 “I am entrusted with the gifts of God.”.363 

Lesson 167 “There is one life, and that I share with God.”.367 

Lesson 168 “Your grace is given me. 
I claim it now.”.370 

Lesson 169 “By grace I live. 
By grace I am released.”.372 

Lesson 170 “There is no cruelty in God and none in me.”.375 

Review 5 (W170 R5).379 

Introduction.379 

Lesson 171 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.383 

Lesson 172 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.384 

Lesson 173 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.385 

Lesson 174 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.386 

Lesson 175 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.387 

Lesson 176 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.388 

Lesson 177 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.389 

Lesson 178 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.390 

Lesson 179. 
“God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.391 

Lesson 180 “God is but Love, and therefore so am I.”.392 

Lesson 181 “I trust my brothers, who are one with me.”.393 

Lesson 182 “I call upon God's Name and on my own.”.396 

Lesson 183 “I will be still a moment and go home.”.399 

Lesson 184 “The Name of God is my inheritance.”.402 

Lesson 185 “I want the peace of God.”.406 

Lesson 186 “Salvation of the world depends on me.”.410 

Lesson 187 “I bless the world because I bless myself.”.414 

Lesson 188 “The peace of God is shining in me now.”.417 

Lesson 189 “I feel the Love of God within me now.”.420 

Lesson 190 “I choose the joy of God instead of pain.”.423 

Lesson 191 “I am the holy Son of God Himself’.426 

Lesson 192 “I have a function God would have me fill.”.429 

Lesson 193 “All things areLessons God would have me learn.”.432 

Lesson 194 “I place the future in the hands of God.”.435 


999 

PROOF COPY 


II-vii 













































Volume II - Workbook 

Table of Contents 


Lesson 195 “Love is the way I walk in gratitude.”. 


Lesson 196 “It can be but myself I crucify.”. 


Lesson 197 “It can be but my gratitude I earn.”. 


Lesson 198 “Only my condemnation injures me.”. 


Lesson 199 “I am not a body. 
I am free.”. 


Lesson 200 “There is no peace except the peace of God.” 
Review 6 (W 200 R6). 



Introduction .. 
















Lesson 201 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 202 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 203 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 204 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 205 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 206 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 207 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 208 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 209 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 210 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 211 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 212 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 213 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 214 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 215 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 216 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 217 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 218 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 219 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 


Lesson 220 

“I 

am 

not 

a 

body. 


I 

am 

free. 


For I 

am 

still 

as 

God 

created 

me. 



Introduction to Part 2 (W 220 In2). 


(1) What is forgiveness? (W 220 Wl). 


Lesson 221 “Peace to my mind. 
Let all my thoughts be still.” 

Lesson 222 “God is with me. 
I live and breathe in Him.”. 


Lesson 223 “God is my life. 
I have no life but His.”. 


Lesson 224 “God is my Father, and He loves His Son.”. 


Lesson 225 “God is my Father, and His Son loves Him.”. 


Lesson 226 “My home awaits me. 
I will hasten there.”. 


Lesson 227 “This is my holy instant of release.”. 


Lesson 228 “God has condemned me not. 
No more do I.”. 


Lesson 229 “Love, Which created me, is what I am.”. 


Lesson 230 “Now will I seek and find the peace of God.”. 


(2) What is salvation? (W 230 W2). 


Lesson 231 “Father, I will but to remember You.”. 



1000 

PROOF COPY 


438 

441 

444 

446 

450 

452 

455 

455 

'457 

'458 

'459 

'460 

'461 

'462 

'463 

'464 

'465 

466 

'467 

'468 

469 

'470 

'471 

'472 

'473 

'474 

'475 

'476 

477 

481 

483 

484 

485 

486 

487 

488 

489 

490 

491 

492 

493 

495 
























Volume II - Workbook 
Table of Contents 

Lesson 232 “Be in my mind, my Father, through the day.”.496 

Lesson 233 “I give my life to God to run today.”.497 

Lesson 234 “Father, today I am Your Son again.”.498 

Lesson 235 “God in His mercy wills that I be saved.”.499 

Lesson 236 “I rule my mind, which I alone must rule.”.500 

Lesson 237 “Now would I be as God created me.”.501 

Lesson 238 “On my decision all salvation rests.”.502 

Lesson 239 “The glory of my Father is my own.”.503 

Lesson 240 “Fear is not justified in any form.”.504 

(3) What is the world? (W 240 W3).505 

Lesson 241 “This holy instant is salvation come.”.507 

Lesson 242 “This day is God's. 
It is my gift to Him.”.508 

Lesson 243 “Today I will judge nothing that occurs.”.509 

Lesson 244 “I am in danger nowhere in the world.”.510 

Lesson 245 “Your peace is with me, Father. 
I am safe.”.511 

Lesson 246 “To love my Father is to love His Son.”.512 

Lesson 247 “Without forgiveness I will still be blind.”.513 

Lesson 248 “Whatever suffers is not part of me.”.514 

Lesson 249 “Forgiveness ends all suffering and loss.”.515 

Lesson 250 “Let me not see myself as limited.”.516 

(4) What is Sin? (W 250 W4).517 

Lesson 251 “I am in need of nothing but the truth.”.519 

Lesson 252 “The Son of God is my Identity.”.520 

Lesson 253 “My Self is ruler of the universe.”.521 

Lesson 254 “Let every voice but God's be still in me.”.522 

Lesson 255 “This day I choose to spend in perfect peace.”.523 

Lesson 256 “God is the only goal I have today.”.524 

Lesson 257 “Let me remember what my purpose is.”.525 

Lesson 258 “Let me remember that my goal is God.”.526 

Lesson 259 “Let me remember that there is no sin.”.527 

Lesson 260 “Let me remember God created me.”.528 

(5) What is the Body? (W 260 W5).529 

Lesson 261 “God is my refuge and security.”.530 

Lesson 262 “Let me perceive no differences today.”.531 

Lesson 263 “My holy vision sees all things as pure.”.532 

Lesson 264 “I am surrounded by the Love of God.”.533 

Lesson 265 “Creation's gentleness is all I see.”.534 

Lesson 266 “My holy Self abides in you, God's Son.”.535 

Lesson 267 “My heart is beating in the peace of God.”.536 

Lesson 268 “Let all things be exactly as they are.”.537 

Lesson 269 “My sight goes forth to look upon Christ's face.”.538 

Lesson 270 “I will not use the body's eyes today.”.539 

(6) What is the Christ? (W 270 W6).540 

1001 H-ix 

PROOF COPY 













































Volume II - Workbook 

Table of Contents 


Lesson 271 “Christ's is the vision I will use today.”.542 

Lesson 272 “How can illusions satisfy God's Son?”.543 

Lesson 273 “The stillness of the peace of God is mine.”.544 

Lesson 274 “Today belongs to Love. 
Let me not fear.”.545 

Lesson 275 “God's healing Voice protects all things today.”.546 

Lesson 276 “The Word of God is given me to speak.”.547 

Lesson 277 “Let me not bind Your Son with laws I made.”.548 

Lesson 278 “If I am bound, my Father is not free.”.549 

Lesson 279 “Creation's freedom promises my own.”.550 

Lesson 280 “What limits can 1 lay upon God's Son?”.551 

(7) What is the Holy Spirit? (W 280 W7).552 

Lesson 281 “I can be hurt by nothing but my thoughts.”.554 

Lesson 282 “I will not be afraid of love today.”.555 

Lesson 283 “My true Identity abides in You.”.556 

Lesson 284 “I can elect to change all thoughts that hurt.”.557 

Lesson 285 “My holiness shines bright and clear today.”.558 

Lesson 286 “The hush of Heaven holds my heart today.”.559 

Lesson 287 “You are my goal, my Father. 
Only You.”.560 

Lesson 288 “Let me forget my brother's past today.”.561 

Lesson 289 “The past is over. 
It can touch me not.”.562 

Lesson 290 “My present happiness is all I see.”.563 

(8) What is the Real World? (W 290 W8).564 

Lesson 291 “This is a day of stillness and of peace.”.565 

Lesson 292 “A happy outcome to all things is sure.”.566 

Lesson 293 “All fear is past and only love is here.”.567 

Lesson 294 “My body is a wholly neutral thing.”.568 

Lesson 295 “The Holy Spirit looks through me today.”.569 

Lesson 296 “The Holy Spirit speaks through me today.”.570 

Lesson 297 “Forgiveness is the only gift I give.”.571 

Lesson 298 “I love You, Father, and I love Your Son.”.572 

Lesson 299 “Eternal holiness abides in me.”.573 

Lesson 300 “Only an instant does this world endure.”.574 

(9) What is the Second Coming? (W 300 W9).575 

Lesson 301 “And God Himself shall wipe away all tears.”.577 

Lesson 302 “Where darkness was I look upon the light.”.578 

Lesson 303 “The holy Christ is born in me today.”.579 

Lesson 304 “Let not my world obscure the sight of Christ.”.580 

Lesson 305 “There is a peace that Christ bestows on us.”.581 

Lesson 306 “The gift of Christ is all I seek today.”.582 

Lesson 307 “Conflicting wishes cannot be my will.”.583 

Lesson 308 “This instant is the only time there is.”.584 

Lesson 309 “I will not fear to look within today.”.585 


1002 

PROOF COPY 












































Volume II - Workbook 
Table of Contents 

Lesson 310 “In fearlessness and love I spend today.”.586 

(10) What is the Last Judgment? (W 310 W10).587 

Lesson 311 “I judge all things as I would have them be.”.589 

Lesson 312 “I see all things as I would have them be.”.590 

Lesson 313 “Now let a new perception come to me.”.591 

Lesson 314 “I seek a future different from the past.”.592 

Lesson 315 “All gifts my brothers give belong to me.”.593 

Lesson 316 “All gifts I give my brothers are my own.”.594 

Lesson 317 “I follow in the way appointed me.”.595 

Lesson 318 “In me salvation's means and end are one.”.596 

Lesson 319 “I came for the salvation of the world.”.597 

Lesson 320 “My Father gives all power unto me.”.598 

(11) What is Creation? (W 320 Wll).599 

Lesson 321 “Father, my freedom is in You alone.”.601 

Lesson 322 “I can give up but what was never real.”.602 

Lesson 323 “I gladly make the 'sacrifice' of fear.”.603 

Lesson 324 “I merely follow, for I would not lead.”.604 

Lesson 325 “All things I think I see reflect ideas.”.605 

Lesson 326 “I am forever an Effect of God.”.606 

Lesson 327 “I need but call and You will answer me.”.607 

Lesson 328 “I choose the second place to gain the first.”.608 

Lesson 329 “I have already chosen what You will.”.609 

Lesson 330 “I will not hurt myself again today.”.610 

(12) What is the Ego? (W 330 W12).611 

Lesson 331 “There is no conflict, for my will is Yours.”.613 

Lesson 332 “Fear binds the world. 
Forgiveness sets it free.”.614 

Lesson 333 “Forgiveness ends the dream of conflict here.”.615 

Lesson 334 “Today I claim the gifts forgiveness gives.”.616 

Lesson 335 “I choose to see my brother's sinlessness.”.617 

Lesson 336 “Forgiveness lets me know that minds are joined.”.618 

Lesson 337 “My sinlessness protects me from all harm.”.619 

Lesson 338 “I am affected only by my thoughts.”.620 

Lesson 339 “I will receive whatever I request.”.621 

Lesson 340 “I can be free of suffering today.”.622 

(13) What is a Miracle? (W 340 W13).623 

Lesson 341 “I can attack but my own sinlessness,.624 

Lesson 342 “I let forgiveness rest upon all things,.625 

Lesson 343 “I am not asked to make a sacrifice.626 

Lesson 344 “Today 1 learn the law of love;.627 

Lesson 345 “I offer only miracles today,.628 

Lesson 346 “Today the peace of God envelops me,.629 

Lesson 347 “Anger must come from judgment.630 

Lesson 348 “I have no cause for anger or for fear,.631 

1003 n->d 

PROOF COPY 













































Volume II - Workbook 

Table of Contents 


Lesson 349 “Today I let Christ's vision look upon.632 

Lesson 350 “Miracles mirror God's eternal Love.633 

(14) What am I? (W 350 W14).634 

Lesson 351 “My sinless brother is my guide to peace.636 

Lesson 352 “Judgment and love are opposites. 
From one Come all the sorrows 

of the world. 
But from.637 

Lesson 353 “My eyes, my tongue, my hands, my feet today.638 

Lesson 354 “We stand together, Christ and I, in peace.639 

Lesson 355 “There is no end to all the peace and joy.640 

Lesson 356 “Sickness is but another name for sin.641 

Lesson 357 “Truth answers every call we make to.642 

Lesson 358 “No call to God can be unheard or left.643 

Lesson 359 “God's answer is some form of peace.644 

Lesson 360 “Peace be to me, the holy Son of God.645 

FinalLessons (W 360 FL). 
646 

Lesson 361-365. 
“This holy instant would I give to You. 
Be You in charge. 


For I would follow You, Certain that Your direction gives me peace.”.648 

Epilogue (W 361 EP). 
649 


1004 

PROOF COPY 


















Urtext Volume II: Workbook 

Part 1 

Introduction 1 2 (W1 Ini) 

May 26,1969 

w l ini l. 
A theoretical foundation such as the text is neces¬ 
sary as a background to make these exercises meaningful. 


Yet it is the exercises which will make the goal possible. 
An 
untrained mind can accomplish nothing. 
It is the purpose of 
these exercises to train the mind to think along the lines 
which the course sets forth. 


w l ini 2. 
The exercises are very simple. 
They do not require 
more than a few minutes, and it does not matter where or 
when you do them. 
They need no preparation. 
They are 
numbered, running from 1 to 365. 
The training period is one 
year. 
Do not undertake more than one exercise a day. 

w l ini 3. 
The purpose of these exercises is to train the mind 
to a different perception of everything in the world. 
The 
workbook is divided into two sections, the first dealing with 
the undoing of what you see now, and the second with the 
restoration of sight. 
It is recommended that each exercise be 
repeated several times a day, preferably in a different place 
each time, and if possible in every situation in which you 
spend any long period of time. 
The purpose is to train the 
mind to generalize the lessons, so that you will understand 
that each of them is as applicable to one situation as it is to 
another. 


w l ini 4. 
Unless specified to the contrary, the exercise should 

2 

be practiced with the eyes open, since the aim" is to learn 
how to see. 
The only rule that should be followed through¬ 
out is to practice the exercises with great specificity. 
Each 


1 The word “Introduction” is not present in the Urtext manuscript. 


2 The Urtext manuscript has “end.” Handwritten mark-up suggests (aim). 
The Notes has “aim.” 


1005 


II-l 


PROOF 


COPY 



one applies to every situation in which you find yourself, 
and to everything you see in it. 
Each day's exercises are 
planned around one central idea, the exercises themselves 
consisting of applying that idea to as many specifics as pos¬ 
sible. 
Be sure that you do not decide that there are some 
things you see to which the idea for the day is inapplicable. 

The aim W(2) of the exercises will always be 3 to increase the 
application of the idea to everything. 
This will not require 
effort. 
Only be sure that you make no exceptions in applying 
the idea. 


w l ini 5. 
Some of the ideas you will find hard to believe, and 
others will seem quite startling. 
It does not matter. 
You are 
merely asked to apply them to what you see. 
You are not 
asked to judge them, nor even to believe them. 
You are 
asked only to use them. 
It is their use which will give them 
meaning to you, and show you they are true. 
Remember 
only this; you need not believe them, you need not accept 
them, and you need not welcome them. 
Some of them you 
may actively resist. 
None of this will matter, nor decrease 
their efficacy. 
But allow yourself to make no exceptions in 
applying the ideas the exercises contain. 
Whatever your re¬ 
actions to the ideas may be, use them. 
Nothing more than 
this is required. 



3 This line is typed twice, once on the bottom of page one, and crossed out and again on the top of page 
2. 
“The exercises is” is changed to (the exercises will always be). 
The Notes has “will always be.” 


II-2 


1006 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 1 "Nothing I see in this room (on this street, from this 
window, in this place) means anything." 

W 1 L 1. 
Now look slowly around you, and practice applying this 
idea very specifically to whatever you see: 4 
"This table does not mean anything." 

"This chair does not mean anything." 

"This hand does not mean anything." 

"This pen does not mean anything." 

W 1 L 2. 
Then look farther away from your immediate area, and ap¬ 
ply the idea to a wider range: W(3) 

"That door does not mean anything." 

"That body does not mean anything." 

"That lamp does not mean anything." 

"That sign does not mean anything." 

"That shadow does not mean anything." 

W 1 L 3. 
Notice that these statements are not arranged in any order, 
and make no allowance for differences in the kinds of things to 
which they are applied. 
That is the purpose of the exercise. 
The 
statement is merely applied to anything you see. 
As you practice 
applying the idea for the day, use it totally indiscriminately. 
Do not 
attempt to apply it to everything you see, for these exercises should 
not become ritualistic. 
Only be sure that nothing you see is specifi¬ 
cally excluded. 
One thing is like another as far as the application of 
the idea is concerned. 
W(4) 


4 Urtext manuscript has semicolon here. 
We changed it to a colon because that is more appropriate and 
is generally used in the Urtext manuscript for this sort of structure. 
We thus consider the semi-colon an 
inadvertent error here. 
The Notes also has a colon. 



1007 


II-3 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 2 "I have given everything I see in this room (on this 
street, from this window, in this place) all the meaning that 
it has for me." 

w 2 L l. 
The exercises with this idea are the same as those for the 
first one. 
Begin with the things that are near you, and apply the idea 
to whatever your glance rests on. 
Then increase the range outward. 

Turn your head so that you include whatever is to either side. 
If 
possible, turn around and apply the idea to what was behind you. 

Remain as indiscriminate as possible in selecting subjects for its ap¬ 
plication, do not concentrate on anything in particular, and do not 
attempt to include everything in an area or you will introduce 
strain. 
Merely glance easily and fairly quickly around you, trying to 
avoid selection by size, brightness, color, material, or relative impor¬ 
tance to you. 


w 2 L 2. 
Take the subjects simply as you see them. 
Try to apply the 
exercise with equal ease to a body or a button, a fly or a floor, an 
arm or an apple. 
The sole criterion for applying the idea to anything 
is merely that your eyes have 'lighted on it. 
Make no attempt to in¬ 
clude anything in particular, but be sure that nothing is specifically 
excluded. 
W(5) 


II-4 


1008 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 3 "I do not understand anything I see in this room 
(on this street, from this window, in this place)." 

w 3 L l. 
Apply this idea in the same way as the previous ones, with¬ 
out making distinctions of any kind. 
Whatever you see becomes a 
proper subject for applying the idea. 
Be sure that you do not ques¬ 
tion the suitability of anything for the application of the idea. 
These 
are not exercises in judgment. 
Anything is suitable if you see it. 

Some of the things you see may have emotionally-charged meaning 
for you. 
Try to lay such feelings aside, and merely use these things 
exactly as you would anything else. 


w 3 L 2. 
The point of the exercises is to help you clear your mind of 
all past associations, to see things exactly as they appear to you now, 
and to realize how little you really understand about them. 
It is 
therefore essential that you keep a perfectly open mind, unham¬ 
pered by judgment, in selecting the things to which the idea for the 
day is to be applied. 
For this purpose one thing is like another; 
equally suitable and therefore equally useful. 
W(6) 


1009 


II-5 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 4 "These thoughts do not mean anything. 
They are 
like the things I see in this room (on this street, from this 
window, in this place)." 

w 4 L l. 
Unlike the preceding ones, these exercises do not begin with 
the idea for the day. 
In these practice periods, begin with noting the 
thoughts that are crossing your mind for about a minute. 
Then ap¬ 
ply the idea to them. 
If you are already aware of unhappy thoughts 
use them as subjects for the idea. 
Do not, however, select only the 
thoughts you think are "bad." You will find, if you train yourself to 
look at your thoughts, that they represent such a mixture that, in a 
sense, none of them can be called "good" or "bad." This is why they 
do not mean anything. 


w 4 L 2. 
In selecting the subjects for the application of today's idea, 
the usual specificity is required. 
Do not be afraid to use "good" 
thoughts as well as "bad." None of them represents your real 
thoughts, which are being covered up by them. 
The "good" ones of 
which you are aware are but shadows of what lies beyond, and 
shadows make sight difficult. 
The "bad" ones are blocks to sight, 
and make seeing impossible. 
You do not want either, 
w 4 L 3. 
This is a major exercise, and will be repeated from time to 
time in somewhat different form. 
The aim here is to train you in the 
first steps toward the goal of separating the meaningless from the 
meaningful. 
It is a first attempt in the long-range purpose of learn¬ 
ing to see the meaningless as outside you and the meaningful 
within. 
It is also the beginning of training your mind to recognize 
what is the same and what is different. 
In using your thoughts for 
application of the idea for today, identify each thought by the cen¬ 
tral figure or event it contains; for example: 

“This thought about _ does not mean anything. 
It is like the things I 

see in this room (or wherever you are) ” W(7) 

w 4 L 4. 
You can also use the idea for a particular thought which you 
recognize as harmful. 
This practice is useful, but is not a substitute 
for the more random procedures to be followed for the exercises. 


H-6 1010 

PROOF COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Do not, however, examine your mind for more than a minute or so. 

You are too inexperienced as yet to avoid a tendency to become 
pointlessly preoccupied. 
Further, since these exercises are the first 
of their kind, you may find the suspension of judgment in connec¬ 
tion with thoughts particularly difficult. 
Do not repeat these exer¬ 
cises more than three or four times during the day. 
We will return 
to them later. 
W(8) 


1011 


II-7 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 5 "I am never upset for the reason I think." 

w 5 L l. 
This idea, like the preceding one, can be used with any per¬ 
son, situation or event you think is causing you pain. 
Apply it spe¬ 
cifically to whatever you believe is the cause of your upset, using 
the description of the feeling in whatever term seems accurate to 
you. 
The upset may seem to be fear, worry, depression, anxiety, an¬ 
ger, hatred, jealousy, or any number of forms, all of which will be 
perceived as different. 
This is not true. 
However, until you learn 
that form does not matter, each form becomes a proper subject for 
the exercises for the day. 
Applying the same idea to each of them 
separately is the first step in ultimately recognizing they are all the 
same. 


w 5 L 2. 
When using the idea for today for a specific perceived cause 
of an upset in any form, use both the name of the form in which you 
see the upset, and the cause which you ascribe to it. 
For example: 

"i am not angry at _ for the reason I think." 

"I am not afraid of _ for the reason I think." 

But again, this should not be substituted for practice periods in 
which you first search your mind for "sources" of upset in which 
you believe, and forms of upset which you think result. 


w 5 L 3. 
In these exercises, more than in the preceding ones, you may 
find it hard to be indiscriminate, and to avoid giving greater weight 
to some subjects than to others. 
It might help to precede the exer¬ 
cises with the statement: 

"There are no small upsets. 
They are all equally disturbing to my 
peace of mind." 

Then examine your mind for whatever is distressing you, regardless 
of how much or how little you think it is doing so. 

w 5 L 4. 
You may also find yourself less willing to apply today's idea 
W(9) to some perceived sources of upset than to others. 
If this oc¬ 
curs, think first of this: 


II-8 


1012 


PROOF 


COPY 




Volume II Workbook 


"I cannot keep this form of upset and let the others go. 
For the pur¬ 
poses of these exercises, then, I will regard them all as the same." 
Then search your mind for no more than a minute or so, and try to 
identify a number of different forms of upset that are disturbing 
you, regardless of the relative importance you may give them. 
Ap¬ 
ply the idea for today to each of them, using the name of both the 
source of the upset as you perceive it, and of the feelings as you ex¬ 
perience it. 
Further examples are: 

“I am not worried about _ _for the reason I think." 

"I am not depressed about _ _for the reason I think." 

Three or four times during the day is enough. 
W(10) 


1013 


II-9 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 6 "I am upset because I see something that is not 
there." 

W 6 L l. 
The exercises with this idea are very similar to the preceding 
ones. 
Again, it is necessary to name both the form of upset (anger, 
fear, worry, depression, and so on) and the perceived source very 
specifically for any application of the idea. 
For example: 

"I am angry at _ because I see something that is not there." 

"I am worried about _ because I see something that is not there." 

W 6 L 2. 
Today's idea is useful for application to anything that seems 
to upset you, and can profitably be used throughout the day for that 
purpose. 
However, the three or four practice periods which are re¬ 
quired should be preceded by a minute or so of mind-searching, as 
before, and the application of the idea to each upsetting thought un¬ 
covered in the search. 


W 6 L 3. 
Again, if you resist applying the idea to some upsetting 
thoughts more than to others, remind yourself of the two cautions 
stated in the previous lesson: 

"There are no small upsets. 
They are all equally disturbing to my 
peace of mind." 


and 


"I cannot keep this form of upset and let the others go. 
For the pur¬ 
poses of these exercises, then, I will regard them all as the same" W(il) 


11-10 


1014 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 7 "I see only the past." 

W 7 L 1. 
This idea is particularly difficult to believe at first. 
Yet it is 
the rationale for all of the preceding ones. 


It is the reason why nothing that you see means anything. 
It is the rea¬ 
son why you have given everything you see all the meaning that it has 
for you. 
It is the reason why you do not understand anything you see. 


It is the reason why your thoughts do not mean anything, and why 
they are like the things you see. 


It is the reason why you are never upset for the reason you think. 


It is the reason why you are upset because you see something that is 
not there. 


w 7 L 2. 
Old ideas about time are very difficult to change, because 
everything you believe is rooted in time, and depends on your not 
learning these new ideas about it. 
Yet that is precisely why you 
need new ideas about time. 
This first time idea is not really so 
strange as it may sound at first. 
Look at a cup, for example. 


w 7 L 3. 
Do you see a cup, or are you merely reviewing your past 
experiences of picking up a cup, being thirsty, drinking from a cup, 
feeling the rim of a cup against your lips, having breakfast, and so 
on? Are not your aesthetic reactions to the cup, too, based on past 
experiences? How else would you know whether or not this kind of 
cup will break if you drop it? What do you know about this cup ex¬ 
cept what you learned in the past? You would have no idea what 
this cup is except for your past learning. 
Do you, then, really see it? 
w 7 L 4. 
Look about you. 
This is equally true of whatever you look 
at. 
Acknowledge this by applying the idea for today indiscrimi¬ 
nately to whatever catches your eye. 
For example:W(l2) 

"I see only the past in this pencil." 

"I see only the past in this shoe." 

"I see only the past in this hand." 

"I see only the past in that body." 


1015 


11-11 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


"I see only the past in that face." 

Do not linger over any one thing in particular, but remember to omit 
nothing specifically. 
5 Glance briefly at each subject, and then move 
on to the next. 
W(13) 


5 The Urtext manuscript shows a comma here, but capitalizes the next word “Glance” suggesting a new 
sentence. 
FIP puts a sentence break here too. 



1016 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 8 "My mind is preoccupied with past thoughts." 

w 8 L l. 
This idea is, of course, the reason why you see only the past. 

No-one really sees anything. 
He sees only his thoughts projected 
outward. 
The mind's preoccupation with the past is the cause of the 
total misconception about time from which your seeing suffers. 


Your mind cannot grasp the present, which is the only time there is. 

It therefore cannot understand time, and cannot, in fact, understand 
anything. 


W 8 L 2. 
The only wholly true thought one can hold about the past is 
that it is not here. 
To think about it at all is therefore to think about 
illusions. 
6 Very few minds have realized what is actually entailed in 
picturing the past or in anticipating the future. 
The mind is actually 
blank when it does this, because it is not really thinking about any¬ 
thing. 


w 8 L 3. 
The purpose of the exercises for today is to begin to train 
your mind to recognize when it is not really thinking at all. 
While 
thoughtless "ideas" preoccupy your mind, the truth is blocked. 

Recognizing that your mind has been merely blank, rather than be¬ 
lieving that it is filled with real ideas, is the first step to opening the 
way to vision. 


w 8 L 4. 
The exercises for today should be done with eyes closed. 

This is because you actually cannot see anything, and it is easier to 
recognize that no matter how vividly you may picture a thought, 
you are not seeing anything. 
With as little investment as possible, 
search your mind for the usual minute or so, merely noting the 
thoughts 7 you find there. 
Name each one by the central figure or 
theme it contains, and pass on to the next. 
Introduce the practice 
period by saying: 

"I seem to be thinking about _." W(14) 

Then name each of your thoughts specifically, for example: 

6 The Urtexl manuscript has “delusions.” Handwritten mark-up suggests (illusions). 
The Notes has 
“illusions.” 

7 The Urtext manuscript has the word “that” crossed out. 
The word is not present in the Notes. 



1017 


11-13 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


"I seem to be thinking about (name of person), about (name of object), 
about (name of emotion), and so on," 
concluding at the end of the mind-searching period with: 

"But my mind is preoccupied with past thoughts." 

W 8 L 5. 
This can be done four or five times during the day, unless 
you find it irritates you. 
If you find it trying, three or four times is 
sufficient. 
You might find it helpful, however, to include your irrita¬ 
tion, or any emotion which the idea 8 may induce, in the mind¬ 
searching itself. 
W(l5) 


8 Handwritten mark-up suggests (for today). 
The Notes does not have “for today.” 


11-14 


1018 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 9 "I see nothing as it is now." 

w 9 L l. 
This idea obviously follows from the two preceding ones. 

But while you may be able to accept it intellectually, it is unlikely 
that it will mean anything to you as yet. 
However, understanding is 
not necessary at this point. 
In fact, the recognition that you do not 
understand is a prerequisite for undoing your false ideas. 
These ex¬ 
ercises are concerned with practice, not with understanding. 
You 
do not need to practice what you really understand. 
It would in¬ 
deed be circular to aim at understanding, and assume that you have 
it already. 


W 9 L 2. 
It is difficult for the untrained mind to believe that what 
seems to be pictured before it is not there. 
This idea can be quite 
disturbing, and may meet with active resistance in any number of 
forms. 
Yet that does not preclude applying it. 
No more than that is 
required for these or any other exercises. 
Each little 9 step will clear a 
little of the darkness away, and understanding will finally come to 
lighten every corner of the mind which 10 has been cleared of the de¬ 
bris which darkens it. 


w 9 L 3. 
These exercises, for which three or four practice periods are 
sufficient, involve looking about you and applying the idea for the 
day to whatever you see, remembering * 11 the need for its indiscrimi¬ 
nate application, and the essential rule of excluding nothing. 
12 It is 
emphasized again that while complete inclusion should not be at¬ 
tempted, specific exclusion must be avoided. 
Be sure you are honest 
with yourself in making this distinction. 
You may be tempted to 
obscure it. 
W(l6) 
w 9 L 4. 
For example: 

"Ido not see that 13 typewriter as it is now." 

9 The Urtext manuscript has “little” crossed out. 
FIP has “small” here. 
The Notes has “little.” 

10 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 
The Notes has the glyph for “which.” 

11 The Urtext manuscript shows “that” crossed out. 
It is not present in the Notes and doesn’t work here 
grammatically. 


12 Handwritten mark-up suggests (insert below on next page.) FIP does so. 
The “next page” material 
here is not present in the Notes. 


13 Handwritten mark-up suggests (this). 
This material is not present in the Notes. 



1019 


11-15 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


"I do not see this key as it is now." 

"I do not see this telephone as it is now." 

Begin with things that are nearest you, and then extend the range: 

“I do trot see that coat rack as it is now. 
’’ 

“I do not see that face as it is now. 
” 

"I do not see that door as it is now. 
’ ,14 W(17) 


14 FIP adds (It is emphasized again that while complete inclusion should not be attempted, specific 
exclusion must be avoided. 
Be sure you are honest in making this distinction. 
You may be tempted to 
obscure it.) This material is not present in the Notes. 



11-16 


1020 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 10 "My thoughts do not mean anything." 

W 10 L 1. 
This idea applies to all the thoughts of which you are 
aware, or become aware in the practice periods. 
The reason the idea 
is applicable to all of them is that they are not your real thoughts. 


We have made this distinction before, and will again. 
You have no 
basis for comparison as yet. 
When you do, you will have no doubt 
that what you once believed were your thoughts did not mean any¬ 
thing. 


w 10 L 2. 
This is the second time we have used this kind of idea. 
The 
form is only slightly different. 
This time, the idea is introduced with 
"My thoughts" instead of "These thoughts," and no link is made 
overtly with the things around you. 
The emphasis is now on the 
lack of reality of what you think you think. 


w 10 L 3. 
This aspect of the correction process began with the idea 
that the thoughts of which you are aware are meaningless, outside 
rather than within; and then stressed their past rather than their pre¬ 
sent status. 
Now we are emphasizing that the presence of these 
"thoughts" means that you are not thinking. 
This is merely another 
way of repeating our earlier statement that your mind is really a 
blank. 
To recognize this is to recognize nothingness when you think 
you see it. 
As such, it is the prerequisite for vision. 


w 10 L 4. 
Close your eyes for these exercises, and introduce them by 
repeating the idea for today quite slowly to yourself. 
Then add: 

"This idea will help to release me from all that I now believe." 

The exercises consist, as before, in searching your mind for all the 
thoughts which are available to you, without selection or judgment. 

Try to avoid classification of any kind. 
In fact, if you find it helpful 
to do so, you might imagine that you are watching an oddly as¬ 
sorted procession going by, which has little if any personal meaning 
to you. 
As each one crosses your mind, say: 

"This thought about _ does not mean anything." 

“That thought about _ does not mean anything. 
’’ W(18) 


1021 


11-17 


PROOF 


COPY 




Part 1 


w 10 L 5. 
Today's idea can obviously serve for any thought that dis¬ 
tresses you at any time. 
In addition, five practice periods are rec¬ 
ommended, each involving no more than a minute or so of mind¬ 
searching. 
It is not recommended that this time period be extended, 
and it should be reduced to half a minute or even less if you experi¬ 
ence discomfort. 
Remember, however, to repeat the idea slowly be¬ 
fore applying it specifically, and also to add: 

"This idea will help to release me from all that I now believe." W(19) 


11-18 


1022 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 11 "My meaningless thoughts are showing me a 
meaningless world." 

W 11 L 1. 
This is the first idea we have had which is related to a ma¬ 
jor phase of the correction process; the reversal of the thinking of the 
world. 
It seems as if the world determines what you perceive. 
To¬ 
day's idea introduces the concept that your thoughts determine the 
world you see. 
Be glad indeed to practice it in this initial form, for 
in this idea is your release made sure. 
The key to forgiveness lies in 
it. 


w 11L 2. 
The practice periods for today's idea are to be undertaken 
somewhat differently from the previous ones. 
Begin with eyes 
closed, and repeat the idea slowly to yourself. 
Then open your eyes 
and look about, near or far, up or down, — anywhere. 
During the 
minute or so to be spent in using the idea, merely repeat it to your¬ 
self, being sure to do so without haste and with no sense of urgency 
or effort. 


w 11 L 3. 
To do these exercises for maximum benefit, the eyes should 
move from one thing to another fairly rapidly, since they should not 
linger on anything in particular. 
The words, however, should be 
used in an unhurried, even leisurely fashion. 
The introduction to 
this idea should be practiced as casually as possible. 
It contains the 
foundation for the peace, relaxation and freedom from worry that 
we are trying to achieve. 
On concluding the exercises, close your 
eyes and repeat the idea once more, slowly to yourself, 
w ll L 4. 
Three practice periods today will probably be sufficient. 

However, if there is little or no uneasiness and an inclination to do 
more, as many as five may be undertaken. 
More than this is not rec¬ 
ommended. 
W(20) 


1023 


11-19 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 12 "I am upset because I see a meaningless world." 

W 12 L 1. 
The importance of this idea lies in the fact that it contains a 
correction for a major perceptual distortion. 
You think that what 
upsets you is a frightening world, or a sad world, or a violent world, 
or an insane world. 
All these attributes are given it by you. 
The 
world is meaningless in itself. 


w 12 L 2. 
These exercises are done with eyes open. 
Look around 
you, this time quite slowly. 
Try to pace yourself so that the slow 
shifting of your glance from one thing to another involves a fairly 
constant time interval. 
Do not allow the time of the shift to become 
markedly longer or shorter, but try, instead, to keep a measured, 
even tempo throughout. 
What you see does not matter. 
You teach 
yourself this as you give whatever your glance rests on equal atten¬ 
tion and equal time. 
This is a beginning step in learning to give 
them all equal value. 


w 12 L 3. 
As you look about you, say to yourself: 

"I think I see a fearful world, a dangerous world, a hostile world, a sad 
world, a wicked world, a crazy world," 

and so on, using whatever descriptive terms happen to occur to you. 

If terms which seem positive rather than negative occur to you, in¬ 
clude them. 
For example, you might think of "a good world," or "a 
satisfying world." If such terms occur to you, use them along with 
the rest. 
You may not yet understand why these "nice" adjectives 
belong in these exercises, but remember that "a good world" implies 
a "bad" one, and "a satisfying world" implies an "unsatisfying" one. 

All terms which cross your mind are suitable subjects for today's 
exercises. 
Their seeming quality does not matter. 


w 12 L 4. 
Be sure that you do not alter the time intervals between ap¬ 
plying today's idea to what you think is pleasant and what you 
think is unpleasant. 
For the purposes of these exercises, there is no 
difference between them. 
W(2l) At the end of the practice period. 



add: 


"But I am upset because I see a meaningless world. 



11-20 


1024 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


W 12 L 5. 
What is meaningless is neither good nor bad. 
Why, then, 
should a meaningless world upset you? If you could accept the 
world as meaningless and let the truth be written upon it for you, it 
would make you indescribably happy. 
But because it is meaning¬ 
less, you are impelled to write upon it what you would have it be. 
It 
is this you see in it. 
It is this that is meaningless in truth. 
Beneath 
your words is written the Word of God. 
The truth upsets you now, 
but when your words have been erased, you will see His. 
That is 
the ultimate purpose of these exercises. 


W 12 L 6. 
Three or four times is enough for practicing the idea for 
today. 
Nor should the practice periods exceed a minute. 
You may 
find even this too long. 
Terminate the exercises whenever you ex¬ 
perience a sense of strain. 
W(22) 


1025 


11-21 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 13 "A meaningless world engenders fear." 

W 13 L 1 . 
Today's idea is really another form of the preceding one, 
except that it is more specific as to the emotion aroused. 
Actually, a 
meaningless world is impossible. 
Nothing without meaning exists. 

However, it does not follow that you will not 15 perceive something 
that has no meaning. 
On the contrary, you will be particularly likely 
to think you do 16 perceive it. 


w 13 L 2. 
Recognition of meaninglessness arouses intense anxiety in 
all the separated ones. 
It represents a situation in which God and 
the ego "challenge" each other as to whose meaning is to be written 
in the empty space which meaninglessness provides. 
The ego 
rushes in frantically to establish its own "ideas" there, fearful that 
the void may otherwise be used to demonstrate its own unreality. 

And on this alone it is correct. 


w 13 L 3. 
It is essential, therefore, that you learn to recognize the 
meaningless, and accept it without fear. 
If you are fearful, it is cer¬ 
tain that you will endow the world with attributes which it does not 
possess, and crowd it with images that do not exist. 
To the ego illu¬ 
sions are safety devices, as they must also be to you who equate 
yourself with the ego. 


w 13 L 4. 
The exercises for today, which should be done about three 
or four times, for not more than a minute or so at most each time, 
are to be practiced in a somewhat different way from the preceding 
ones. 
With eyes closed, repeat today's idea to yourself. 
Then open 
your eyes and look about you slowly, saying: 17 

"I am looking at a meaningless world." 

Repeat this statement to yourself as you look about. 
Then close 
your eyes and conclude with: "A meaningless world engenders fear 
because I think I am in competition with God." W(23) 


15 Handwritten mark-up suggests (think you). 
That is not present in the Notes. 


16 Handwritten mark-up suggests (so). 
The Notes has “do.” 

17 Handwritten mark-up suggests (saying:), it’s not in the Urtext manuscript. 
The Notes includes the 
word, however, so we include it also. 



11-22 


1026 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


W 13 L 5. 
You may find it difficult to avoid resistance, in one form or 
another, to this concluding statement. 
Whatever form such resis¬ 
tance may take, remind yourself that you are really afraid of such a 
thought because of the "vengeance" of the "enemy." You are not 
expected to believe the statement at this point, and will probably try 
to dismiss it as preposterous. 
Note carefully, however, any signs of 
overt or covert fear which it may arouse. 


W 13 L 6. 
This is our first attempt at stating an explicit cause and ef¬ 
fect relationship of a kind which you are very inexperienced in rec¬ 
ognizing. 
Do not dwell on the concluding statement, and try not 
even to think of it except during the exercise periods. 
That will suf¬ 
fice at present. 
W(24) 


1027 


11-23 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 14 "God did not create a meaningless world." 

w 14 L l. 
The idea for today is, of course, the reason why a meaning¬ 
less world is impossible. 
What God did not create does not exist. 

And everything that does exist exists as He created it. 
The world 
you see has nothing to do with reality. 
It is of your own making, 
and it does not exist. 


w 14 L 2. 
The exercises for today are to be practiced with eyes closed 
throughout. 
The mind-searching period should be short, a minute 
at most. 
Do not have more than three practice periods with today's 
idea unless you find them comfortable. 
If you do, it will be because 
you really understand what they are for. 


W 14 L 3. 
The idea for today is another step in learning to let go the 
thoughts which you have written on the world, and see the Word of 
God in their place. 
The early steps in this exchange, which can truly 
be called salvation, can be quite difficult and even quite painful. 

Some of them will lead you directly into fear. 
You will not be left 
there. 
You will go far beyond it. 
Our direction is toward perfect 
safety and perfect peace. 


w 14 L 4. 
With eyes closed, think of all the horrors in the world that 
cross your mind. 
Name each one as it occurs to you, and then deny 
its reality. 
God did not create it, and so it is not real. 
Say, for exam¬ 
ple: 

"God did not create that war, and so it is not real." 

"God did not create that airplane crash, and so it is not real." 

"God did not create that disaster (specify) so it is not real." 

"God did not create that illness(specify with name of person) and so it 
is not real ." 18 

w 14 L 5. 
Suitable subjects for the application of today's idea also in¬ 
clude anything you are afraid might happen to you, or to anyone 
about whom you are concerned. 
In each case, name the "disaster" 


18 This fourth line is not present in the Urtext manuscript or FIP but it is present in the Notes, so we 
include it as probably an inadvertent omission. 



11-24 


1028 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


quite specifically. 
W(25) Do not use general terms. 
For example, do 
not say, "God did not create illness," but, "God did not create can¬ 
cer," or heart attacks, or whatever may arouse fear in you. 


W 14 L 6. 
This is your personal repertory of horrors at which you are 
looking. 
These things are part of the world you see. 
Some of them 
are shared illusions, and others are part of your personal hell. 
It 
does not matter. 
What God did not create can only be in your own 
mind apart from His. 
Therefore, it has no meaning. 
In recognition 
of this fact, conclude the practice periods by repeating today's idea. 

"God did not create a meaningless world." 

w 14 L 7. 
The idea for today can, of course, be applied to anything 
that disturbs you during the day, aside from the practice periods. 


Be very specific in applying it. 
Say: 

‘‘God did not create a meaningless world. 
He did not create (specify 
the situation which is disturbing you ), and so it is not real. 
’’ W(26) 


1029 

PROOF COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 15 "My thoughts are images which I have made." 

w 15 L l. 
It is because the thoughts you think you think appear as 
images that you do not recognize them as nothing. 
You think you 
think them, and so you think you see them. 
This is how your "see¬ 
ing" was made. 
This is the function you have given your body's 
eyes. 
It is not seeing. 
It is image-making. 
It takes the place of see¬ 
ing, replacing vision with illusions. 


W 15 L 2. 
This introductory idea to the process of image-making 
which you call seeing will not have much meaning for you. 
You 
will begin to understand it when you have seen little edges of light 
around the same familiar objects which you see now. 
That is the 
beginning of real vision. 
You can be certain that real vision will 
come quickly when this has occurred. 


W 15 L 3. 
As we go along, you may have many "light episodes". 

They may take many different forms, some of them quite unex¬ 
pected. 
Do not be afraid of them. 
They are signs that you are open¬ 
ing your eyes at last. 
They will not persist, because they merely 
symbolize true perception, and they are not related to knowledge. 

These exercises will not reveal knowledge to you. 
But they will 
prepare the way to it. 


w 15 L 4. 
In practicing the idea for today, repeat it first to yourself, 
and then apply it to whatever you see around you, using its name 
and letting your eyes rest on it as you say: 

“This _ is an image which I have made." 

"That _ is an image which I have made." 

It is not necessary to include a large number of specific subjects for 
the application of today's idea. 
It is necessary, however, to continue 
to look at each subject while you repeat the idea to yourself. 
The 
idea should be repeated quite slowly each time. 
W(27) 

w 15 L 5. 
Although you will obviously not be able to apply the idea 
to very many things during the minute or so of practice that is rec¬ 
ommended, try to make the selection as random as possible. 
Less 


11-26 


1030 


PROOF 


COPY 




Volume II Workbook 


than a minute will do for the practice periods, if you begin to feel 
uneasy. 
Do not have more than three application periods for today's 
idea unless you feel completely comfortable with it, and do not ex¬ 
ceed four. 
19 W(28) 


19 Handwritten mark-up suggests (However, the idea can be applied as needed throughout the day.). 

That line is not present in the Notes. 



1031 


11-27 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 16 "I have no neutral thoughts." 

w 16 L l. 
The idea for today is a beginning step in dispelling the be¬ 
lief that your thoughts have no effect. 
Everything you see is the re¬ 
sult of your thoughts. 
There is no exception to this fact. 
Thoughts 
are not big or little; powerful or weak. 
They are merely true or false. 

Those which are true create their own likeness. 
20 Those which are 
false make theirs. 


W 16 L 2. 
There is no more self-contradictory concept than that of 
"idle thoughts." What gives rise to the perception of a whole world 
can hardly be called idle. 
Every thought you have contributes to 
truth or to illusion; either it extends the truth or it multiplies illu¬ 
sions. 
You can indeed multiply nothing, but you will not extend it 
by doing so. 


W 16 L 3. 
In addition to never being idle, salvation requires that you 
recognize that every thought you have brings either peace or war; 
either love or fear. 
A neutral result is impossible because a neutral 
thought is impossible. 
There is such a temptation to dismiss fear 
thoughts as unimportant, trivial; and not worth bothering about that 
it is essential you recognize them all as equally destructive but 
equally unreal. 
We will practice this idea in many forms before you 
really understand it. 


W 16 L 4. 
In applying the idea for today, search your mind for a min¬ 
ute or so, with eyes closed, and actively seek not to overlook any 
"little" thought which tends to elude the search. 
This is quite diffi¬ 
cult until you get used to it. 
You will find that it is still hard for you 
not to make artificial distinctions. 
Every thought that occurs to you, 
regardless of the quality which you assign to it, is a suitable subject 
for applying today's idea. 
W(29) 


20 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



11-28 


1032 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 16 L 5. 
In the practice periods, first repeat the idea, and then as 
each one crosses your mind, hold it in awareness while you tell 
yourself: 

“This thought about _ is not a neutral thought." 

"That thought about _ is not a neutral thought." 

w 16 L 6. 
As usual, use today's idea whenever you are aware of a 
particular thought which arouses uneasiness. 
The following form is 
suggested for this purpose: 

"This thought about _ is not a neutral thought, because I have no 

neutral thoughts." 

W 16 L 7. 
Four or five practice periods are recommended, if you find 
them relatively effortless. 
If strain is experienced, three will be 
enough. 
The length of the exercise period 21 should also be reduced 
if there is discomfort. 
W(30) 


11 The Urtext manuscript has (, however) crossed out. 
The word “however” is not present in the Notes. 


1033 H-2 ( 

PROOF COPY 






Part 1 


Lesson 17 "I see no neutral things." 

W 17 L 1 . 
This idea is another step in the direction of identifying 
cause and effect as it really operates. 
You see no neutral things be¬ 
cause you have no neutral thoughts. 
It is always the thought that 
comes first, despite the temptation to believe that it is really the 
other way around. 
This is not the way the world thinks, but you 
must learn that it is the way you think. 
If it were not so, perception 
would have no cause, and would itself be the cause of reality. 
In 
view of its highly variable nature, this is hardly likely, 
w 17 L 2. 
In applying today's idea, say to yourself, with eyes open: 

"I see no neutral things because I have no neutral thoughts." 

Then look about you, resting your glance on each thing that catches 
your eye long enough to say: 

“I do not see a neutral _ because my thoughts about _ are not 

neutral. 
’’ 

For example, you might say: 

"l do not see a neutral wall, because my thoughts about walls are not 
neutral." 

"I do not see a neutral body, because my thoughts about bodies are not 
neutral." 

w 17 L 3. 
As usual, it is essential to make no distinction between 
what you believe to be animate or inanimate; pleasant or unpleas¬ 
ant. 
Regardless of what you may believe, you do not see anything 
which is really alive and really joyous. 
That is because you are un¬ 
aware as yet of any thoughts which are really true and therefore 
really happy. 


W 17 L 4. 
Three or four specific practice periods are recommended, 
and no less than three are required for maximum benefit, even if 
you experience resistance. 
However, if you do, the length of the 
practice period may be reduced to less than the minute or so which 
is otherwise recommended. 
W(31) 


11-30 


1034 


PROOF 


COPY 




Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 18 "I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my 
seeing." 

W 18 L 1. 
The idea for today is another step in learning that the 
thoughts which give rise to what you see are never neutral or unim¬ 
portant. 
It also emphasizes the idea that minds are joined, which 
will be given increasing stress later. 


w 18 L 2. 
Today's idea does not refer to what you see as much as to 
how you see it. 
Therefore, the exercises for today will emphasize 
this aspect of your perception. 
The three or four practice periods 
which are recommended should be done as follows: 

w 18 L 3. 
Selecting subjects for the application of the idea randomly, 
look at each one long enough to say: 

“I am not alone in experiencing the effects of how I see _. 
” 

Conclude the practice period by repeating the more general statement: 
"I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my seeing 
A minute or so or even less will be sufficient. 
W(32) 


1035 


11-31 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 19 "I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my 
thoughts." 

w 19 L l. 
The idea for today is obviously the reason why your seeing 
does not affect you alone. 
You will notice that at times the ideas re¬ 
lated to thinking precede those related to perceiving, while at other 
times the order is reversed. 
The reason is that the order does not 
actually matter. 
Thinking and its results are really simultaneous, for 
cause and effect are never separate. 


W 19 L 2. 
Today we are again emphasizing the fact that minds are 
joined. 
This is rarely a wholly welcome idea at first, since it seems 
to carry with it an enormous sense of responsibility, and may even 
be regarded as an "invasion of privacy." Yet it is a fact that there are 
no private thoughts. 
Despite your initial resistance to this idea, you 
will yet understand that it must be true if salvation is possible at all. 

And salvation must be possible because it is the Will of God. 


W 19 L 3. 
The minute or so of mind-searching which today's exercises 
require are 22 to be undertaken with closed eyes. 
The idea is to be 
repeated first, and then the mind should be carefully searched for 
the thoughts it contains at that time. 
As you consider each one, 
name it in terms of the central person or theme it contains, and hold¬ 
ing it in your mind as you do so, say: 

“lam not alone in experiencing the effects of this thought about _. 
” 

W 19 L 4. 
The requirement of as much indiscriminateness as possible 
in selecting subjects for the practice period should be quite familiar 
to you by now, and will no longer be repeated each day, although it 
will occasionally be included as a reminder. 
Do not forget, how¬ 
ever, that random selection of subjects for all practice periods re¬ 
mains essential throughout. 
Lack of order in this connection will 
ultimately make the recognition of lack of order in miracles mean¬ 
ingful to you. 
W(33) 


2 The Urtext manuscript says “are” and so does the Notes but agreement in number arguably requires 
“is”, which is what FIP uses. 
Is “a minute or so” plural or singular? That is debatable. 



11-32 


1036 


PROOF 


COPY 




Volume II Workbook 


w 19 L 5. 
Apart from the "as needed" application of today's idea, at 
least three practice periods are required, shortening the length of 
time involved, if necessary. 
Do not attempt more than four. 
W(34) 


PROOF 


1037 


COPY 


11-33 


Part 1 


Lesson 20 "I am determined to see." 

w 20 L l. 
We have been quite casual about our practice periods thus 
far. 
There has been virtually no attempt to direct the time for under¬ 
taking them, minimal effort has been required, and not even active 
cooperation and interest have been asked. 
This casual approach has 
been intentional, and very carefully planned. 
We have not lost sight 
of the crucial importance of the reversal of your thinking. 
The salva¬ 
tion of the world depends on it. 
Yet you will not see if you regard 
yourself as being coerced, and if you give in to resentment and op¬ 
position. 


w 20 L 2. 
This is our first attempt to introduce structure. 
Do not mis¬ 
construe it as an effort to exert force or pressure. 
You want salva¬ 
tion. 
You want to be happy. 
You want peace. 
You do not have 
them now because your minds are totally undisciplined, and you 
cannot distinguish between joy and sorrow, pleasure and pain, love 
and fear. 
You are now learning how to tell them apart. 
And great 
indeed will be your reward. 
23 

W 20 L 3. 
Your decision to see is all that vision requires. 
What you 
want is yours. 
Do not mistake the little effort that is asked of you 
for a sign that our goal is of little worth. 
Can the salvation of the 
world be a trivial purpose? And can the world be saved if you are 
not? God has one Son, and he is the resurrection and the life. 
24 His 
will is done because all power is given him in Heaven and on 
earth. 
25 In your determination to see is vision given you. 

w 20 L 4. 
The exercises for today consist in reminding yourselves 
throughout the day that you want to see. 
Today's idea also tacitly 
implies the recognition that you do not see now. 
Therefore, as you 
repeat the idea, you are stating that you are determined to change 
your present state for a better one, and one you really want. 
W(35) 


23 Matthew 5:12 Rejoice and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so they perse¬ 
cuted the prophets who were before you. 


24 John 11:25 Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. 
He who believes in Me, though he 
may die, he shall live. 


2? Matthew 28:18 And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, “All authority has been given to Me in 
heaven and on earth.” 


11-34 


1038 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 20 L 5. 
Repeat today's idea slowly and positively at least twice an 
hour today, attempting to do so every half hour. 
Do not be dis¬ 
tressed if you forget to do so, but make a real effort to remember. 

The extra repetitions should be applied to any situation, person, or 
event which upsets you. 
You can see them differently, and you will. 

What you desire you will see. 
Such is the real law of cause and ef¬ 
fect as it operates in the world. 
W(36) 


1039 


11-35 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 21 "I am determined to see things differently." 

W 21 L 1. 
The idea for today is obviously a continuation and exten¬ 
sion of the preceding one. 
This time, however, specific mind¬ 
searching periods are necessary in addition to applying the idea to 
particular situations as they arise. 
Five practice periods are urged, 
allowing a full minute for each. 


w 21L 2. 
In the practice periods, begin by repeating the idea to your¬ 
self. 
Then close your eyes and search your mind carefully for situa¬ 
tions past, present or anticipated, which arouse anger in you. 
The 
anger may take the form of any reaction ranging from mild irritation 
to rage. 
The degree of the emotion you experience does not matter. 

You will become increasingly aware that a slight twinge of annoy¬ 
ance is nothing but a veil drawn over intense fury. 


w 21L 3. 
Try, therefore, not to let the "little" thoughts of anger es¬ 
cape you in the practice periods. 
Remember that you do not really 
recognize what really arouses anger in you, and nothing that you 
believe in this connection means anything. 
You will probably be 
tempted to dwell more on some situations than on others, on the 
fallacious grounds that they are more "obvious." This is not so. 
It is 
merely an example of the belief that some forms of attack are more 
justified than others. 


W 21 L 4. 
As you search your mind for all the forms in which attack 
thoughts present themselves, hold each one in mind and tell your¬ 
self; 

“I am determined to see _ (name of person) differently." 

"I am determined to see _ (specify the situation) differently." 

Try to be as specific as possible. 
You may, for example, focus your 
anger on a particular attribute of a particular person, believing that 
the anger is limited to this aspect. 
If your perception of the person is 
suffering from this form of distortion, say: 

“I am determined to see _ (specify the attribute) in _ (name of person) differ¬ 

ently. 
” W(37) 


11-36 


1040 


PROOF 


COPY 






Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 22 "What I see is a form of vengeance." 

w 22 L l. 
Today's idea accurately describes the way anyone who 
holds attack thoughts in his mind must see the world. 
Having pro¬ 
jected his anger onto the world, he sees vengeance about to strike at 
him. 
His own attack is thus perceived as self-defense. 
This becomes 
an increasingly vicious circle until he is willing to change how he 
sees. 
Otherwise, thoughts of attack and counterattack will preoc¬ 
cupy him, and people his entire world. 
What peace of mind is pos¬ 
sible to him then? 

w 22 L 2. 
It is from this savage fantasy that you want to escape. 
Is it 
not joyous news to hear that it is not real? Is it not a happy discov¬ 
ery to find that you can escape? You made what you would de¬ 
stroy; everything that you hate and would attack and kill. 
All that 
you fear does not exist. 


w 22 L 3. 
Look at the world about you at least five times today, for at 
least a minute each time. 
As your eyes move slowly from one object 
to another, from one body to another, say to yourself: 

"I see only the perishable. 


I see nothing that will last . 
26 
What I see is a form of vengeance." 

At the end of each practice period, ask yourself: 

"Is this the world I really want to see?" 

The answer is surely obvious. 
W(38) 


26 Handwritten mark-up adds (What I see is not real.). 
That line is present in the Notes but is crossed 


out. 



1041 


11-37 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 23 "I can escape from the world I see by giving up 
attack thoughts." 

w 23 L l. 
The idea for today contains the only way out of fear that 
will 27 succeed. 
Nothing else will work; everything else is meaning¬ 
less. 
But this way cannot fail. 
Every thought you have makes up 
some segment of the world you see. 
It is with your thoughts, then, 
that we must work, if your perception of the world is to be changed, 
w 23 L 2. 
If the cause of the world you see is attack thoughts, you 
must learn that it is these thoughts which you do not want. 
There is 
no point in lamenting the world. 
There is no point in trying to 
change the world. 
It is incapable of change because it is merely an 
effect. 
But there is indeed a point in changing your thoughts about 
the world. 
Here you are changing the cause. 
The effects will change 
automatically. 


W 23 L 3. 
The world you see is a vengeful world, and everything in it 
is a symbol of vengeance. 
Each of your perceptions of "external re¬ 
ality" is a pictorial representation of your own attack thoughts. 
One 
can well ask if this can be called seeing. 
Is not fantasy a better word 
for such a process, and hallucination a more appropriate term for 
the result? 

W 23 L 4. 
You see the world which you have made, but you do not 
see yourself as the image-maker. 
You cannot be saved from the 
world, but you can escape from its cause. 
This is what salvation 
means, for where is the world you see when its cause is gone? Vi¬ 
sion already holds a replacement for everything you think you see 
now. 
Loveliness can light your images, and so transform them that 
you will love them even though they were made of hate. 
For you 
will not be making them alone. 
W(39) 

w 23 L 5. 
The idea for today introduces the thought that you are not 
trapped in the world you see, because its cause can be changed. 


This change requires, first, that the cause be identified and then let 


v Handwritten mark-up suggests (ever). 
That is not present in the Notes. 



11-38 


1042 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


go, so that it can be replaced. 
The first two steps in this process re¬ 
quire your cooperation. 
The final one does not. 
Your images have 
already been replaced. 
By taking the first two steps, you will see 
that this is so. 


w 23 L 6. 
Besides using it throughout the day as the need arises, five 
practice periods are required in applying today's idea. 
As you look 
about you, repeat the idea slowly to yourself, and then close your 
eyes and devote about a minute to searching your mind for as many 
attack thoughts as occur to you. 
As each one crosses your mind, 
say: 

“I can escape from the world by giving up attack thoughts about _. 
” 

Hold each one in mind 28 as you say this, and then dismiss that 
thought and go on to the next. 


W 23 L 7. 
In the practice periods, be sure to include both your 
thoughts of attacking and of being attacked. 
Their effects are exactly 
the same, because they are exactly the same. 
You do not yet recog¬ 
nize this, and you are asked at this time only to treat them as the 
same in today's practice periods. 
We are still at the stage of identify¬ 
ing the cause of the world you see. 
When you finally realize that 
thoughts of attack and of being attacked are not different, you will 
be ready to let the cause go. 
W(40) 


28 Urtext manuscript has a struck-out “one in mind" and replaced it with “attack thought” but “one in 
mind” is the reading in the Notes. 



1043 


11-39 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 24 "I do not perceive my own best interests." 

w 24 L l. 
In no situation which arises do you realize the outcome that 
would make you happy. 
Therefore you have no guide to appropri¬ 
ate action, and no way of judging the result. 
29 What you do is de¬ 
termined by your perception of the situation, and that perception is 
wrong. 
It is inevitable, then, that you will not serve your own best 
interests. 
Yet they are your only goal in any situation which is cor¬ 
rectly perceived. 
Otherwise you will not recognize what they are. 


W 24 L 2. 
If you realized that you do not perceive your own best in¬ 
terests, you could be taught what they are. 
But in the presence of 
your conviction that you do know what they are, you cannot learn. 

The idea for today is a step toward opening your mind so that learn¬ 
ing can begin. 


W 24 L 3. 
The exercises for today require much more honesty than 
you are accustomed to using. 
A few subjects, honestly and carefully 
considered in each of the five practice periods which should be un¬ 
dertaken today, will be more helpful than a more cursory examina¬ 
tion of a large number. 
Two minutes are suggested for each of the 
mind-searching periods which the exercises involve. 


w 24 L 4. 
Practice periods begin with repeating today's idea, fol¬ 
lowed by searching the mind, with closed eyes, for unresolved 
situations about which you are currently concerned. 
The emphasis 
should be on uncovering the outcome you want. 
You will quickly 
realize that you have a number of goals in mind as part of the de¬ 
sired outcome; and also that these goals are on different levels, and 
often conflict. 


W 24 L 5. 
Name each situation that occurs to you, and enumerate 
carefully as many goals as possible that you would like to be met in 
its resolution. 
The form of each application should be roughly as 
follows: W(41) 


19 Originally typed “results” the handwritten mark-up crosses out the “s” making it “result” which is 
what is present in the Notes. 



11-40 


1044 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


“In the situation involving _, I would like _ to happen, and _ 

to happen, ” and so on. 


Try to cover as many different kinds of outcome as may honestly 
occur to you, even if some of them do not appear to you to be di¬ 
rectly related to the situation, or even to be inherent in it at all. 

w 24 L 6. 
If these exercises are done properly, you will quickly rec¬ 
ognize that you are making a large number of demands of the situa¬ 
tion which have nothing to do with it. 
You will also recognize that 
many of your goals are contradictory, that you have no unified out¬ 
come in mind, and that you must experience disappointment in 
connection with some of your goals however the situation turns out. 

After covering the list of as many hoped for goals as possible for 
each unresolved situation that crosses your mind, say to yourself: 

“I do not perceive my own best interests in this situation, ” 

and go on to the next. 
W(42) 


PROOF 


1045 


COPY 


11-41 




Part 1 


Lesson 25 "I do not know what anything is for." 

W25L1. 
Purpose is meaning. 
Today's idea explains why nothing 
you see means anything. 
You do not know what it is for. 
Therefore 
it is meaningless to you. 
Everything is for your own best interests. 

That is what it is for; that is its purpose; that is what it means. 
It is 
in recognizing this that your goals become unified. 
It is in recogniz¬ 
ing this that what you see is given meaning. 


W 25 L 2. 
You perceive the world and everything in it as meaningful 
in terms of ego goals. 
These goals have nothing to do with your 
own best interests, because the ego is not you. 
This false identifica¬ 
tion makes you incapable of understanding what anything is for. 
As 
a result, you are bound to misuse it. 
When you believe this, you will 
try to withdraw the goals you have assigned to the world, instead of 
attempting to reinforce them. 


w 25 L 3. 
Another way of describing the goals you now perceive as 
valuable is to say that they are all concerned with "personal" inter¬ 
ests. 
Since you have no personal interests, your goals are really con¬ 
cerned with nothing. 
In cherishing them, therefore, you have no 
goals at all. 
And thus you do not know what anything is for. 


w 25 L 4. 
Before you can make any sense out of the exercises for to¬ 
day, one more thought is necessary. 
At the most superficial levels, 
you do recognize purpose. 
Yet purpose cannot be understood at 
these levels. 
For example, you do understand that a telephone is for 
the purpose of talking to someone who is not physically in your 
immediate vicinity. 
What you do not understand is what you want 
to reach him for. 
And it is this that makes your contact with him 
meaningful or not. 
W(43) 

W 25 L 5. 
It is crucial to your learning to be willing to give up the 
goals you have established for everything. 
The recognition that they 
are meaningless, rather than "good" or "bad", is the only way to 
accomplish this. 
The idea for today is a step in this direction. 


W 25 L 6. 
Six practice periods, each of two minutes duration, are re¬ 
quired. 
Each practice period should begin with a slow repetition of 


11-42 


1046 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


the idea for today, followed by looking about you and letting your 
glance rest on whatever happens to catch your eye, near or far, "im¬ 
portant" or "unimportant," "human" or "unhuman," with your eyes 
resting on each subject you so select, say, for example: 

"I do not know what this chair is for." 

"I do not know what this pencil is for." 

"I do not know what this hand is for." 

Say this quite slowly, without shifting your eyes until you have 
completed the statement. 
Then move on to the next subject, and 
apply today's idea as before. 
W(44) 


1047 


11-43 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 26 "My attack thoughts are attacking my invulner¬ 
ability." 

w 26 L l. 
It is surely obvious that if you can be attacked you are not 
invulnerable. 
You see attack as a real threat. 
That is because you 
believe that you can really attack. 
And what would have effects 
through you must also have effects on you. 
It is this law that will 
ultimately save you. 
But you are misusing it now. 
You must there¬ 
fore learn how it can be used for your own best interests, rather than 
against them. 


w 26 L 2. 
Because your attack thoughts will be projected, you will 
fear attack. 
And if you fear attack, you must believe that you are 
not invulnerable. 
Attack thoughts therefore make you vulnerable in 
your own mind, which is where the attack thoughts are. 
Attack 
thoughts and invulnerability cannot be accepted together. 
They 
contradict each other. 


w 26 L 3. 
The idea for today introduces the thought that you always 
attack yourself first. 
If attack thoughts must entail the belief that 
you are vulnerable, their effect is to weaken you in your own eyes. 

Thus they have attacked your perception of yourself. 
And because 
you believe in them, you can no longer believe in yourself. 
A false 
image of yourself has come to take the place of what you are. 


W 26 L 4. 
Practice with today's idea will help you to understand that 
vulnerability or invulnerability is the result of your own thoughts. 

Nothing except your thoughts can attack you. 
Nothing except your 
thoughts can make you think you are vulnerable. 
And nothing ex¬ 
cept your thoughts can prove to you this is not so. 
W(45) 

W 26 L 5. 
Six practice periods are required in applying today's idea. 


A full two minutes should be attempted for each of them, although 
the time may be reduced to a minute if the discomfort is too great. 

Do not reduce it further. 


w 26 L 6. 
The practice period should begin with repeating the idea 
for today, then closing your eyes and reviewing the unresolved 
situations whose outcomes are causing you concern. 
The concern 


11-44 


1048 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


may take the form of depression, worry, anger, a sense of imposi¬ 
tion, fear, foreboding, or preoccupation. 
Any problem as yet unset¬ 
tled which tends to recur in your thoughts during the day is a suit¬ 
able subject. 
You will not be able to use very many for one practice 
period, because a longer time than usual should be spent with each 
one. 
Today's idea should be applied as follows: 

First, name the situation: 

“lam concerned about _. 
” 

Then go over every possible outcome which has occurred to you in 
that connection and which has caused you concern, referring to each 
one quite specifically, saying: 

“lam afraid _ will happen. 
” 

If you are doing the exercises properly, you should have some five 
or six distressing possibilities available for each situation you use, 
and quite possibly more. 
It is much more helpful to cover a few 
situations thoroughly than to touch on a larger number. 


W 26 L 7. 
As the list of anticipated outcomes for each situation con¬ 
tinues, you will probably find some of them, especially those which 
occur to you toward the end, less acceptable to you. 
Try, however, 
to treat them all alike to whatever extent you can. 


W 26 L 8. 
After you have named each outcome of which you are 
afraid, tell yourself: 

"That thought is an attack upon myself." 

Conclude each practice period by repeating today's idea once more. 

W(46) 


1049 


11-45 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 27 "Above all else I want to see." 

W 27 L 1 . 
Today's idea expresses something stronger than mere de¬ 
termination. 
It gives vision priority among your desires. 
You may 
feel hesitant about using the idea on the ground that you are not 
sure you really mean it. 
This does not matter. 
The purpose of to¬ 
day's exercises is to bring the time when the idea will be wholly true 
a little nearer. 


w 27 L 2. 
There may be a great temptation to believe that some sort 
of sacrifice is being asked of you when you say you want to see 
above all else. 
If you become uneasy by the lack of reservation in¬ 
volved, add: 

"Vision has no cost to anyone." 

If fear of loss still persists, add further: 

"It can only bless." 

W 27 L 3. 
The idea for today needs many repetitions for maximum 
benefit. 
It should be used at least every half hour, and more often if 
possible. 
You might try for every 15 or 20 minutes. 
It is recom¬ 
mended that you set a definite time interval for using the idea when 
you wake or shortly afterwards, and attempt to adhere to it 
throughout the day. 
It will not be difficult to do this, even if you are 
engaged in conversation or otherwise occupied at the time. 
You can 
still repeat one short sentence to yourself without disturbing any¬ 
thing that is going on. 


W 27 L 4. 
The real question is how often will you remember? How 
much do you want today's idea to be true? Answer one 30 of these 
two questions, and you have answered the other. 
You will proba¬ 
bly miss several applications, and perhaps quite a number. 
Do not 
be disturbed by this, but do try to keep on your schedule from then 
on. 
If only once during the day you feel that you were perfectly sin¬ 
cere while you were repeating today's idea, you can be sure that you 
have saved yourself many years of effort. 
W(47) 

11 The word “one” is not present in the Urtext manuscript. 
FIP changes the phrase to “one of these 
questions” which is what the Notes reads. 



11-46 


1050 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 28 "Above all else I want to see things differently." 

w 28 L l. 
Today we are really giving specific application to the idea 
of for yesterday. 
In these practice periods you will be making a se¬ 
ries of definite commitments. 
The question of whether you will 
keep them in the future is not our concern here. 
If you are willing at 
least to make them now, you have started on the way to keeping 
them. 
And we are still at the beginning. 


w 28 L 2. 
You may wonder why it is important to say, for example, 
"Above all else I want to see this table differently." In itself it is not 
important at all. 
Yet what is by itself? And what does "in itself" 
mean? You see a lot of separate things about you, which really 
means you are not seeing at all. 
You either see or not. 
When you 
have seen one thing differently, you will see all things differently. 

The light you will see in any one of them is the same light you will 
see in them all. 


w 28 L 3. 
When you say "Above all else I want to see this table dif¬ 
ferently," you are making a commitment to withdraw your precon¬ 
ceived ideas about the table, and open your minds to what it is and 
what it is for. 
You are not defining it in past terms. 
You are asking 
what it is, rather than telling it what it is. 
You are not binding its 
meaning to your tiny experiences of tables, nor are you limiting its 
purpose to your little personal thoughts. 


W 28 L 4. 
You will not question what we have already defined. 
And 
the purpose of these exercises is to ask questions and receive the an¬ 
swers. 
In saying, "Above all else I want to see this table differently," 
you are committing yourself to seeing. 
It is not an exclusive com¬ 
mitment. 
It is a commitment which applies to the table just as much 
as to anything else, neither more nor less. 
W(48) 

W 28 L 5. 
You could, in fact, gain vision from just that table, if you 
could withdraw all your own ideas from it, and look upon it with a 
completely open mind. 
It has something to show you; something 
beautiful and clean and of infinite value, full of happiness and hope. 



1051 


11-47 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Hidden under all your ideas about it is its real purpose, the purpose 
it shares with all the universe. 


w 28 L 6. 
In using the table as a subject for applying the idea for to¬ 
day you are therefore really asking to see the purpose of the uni¬ 
verse. 
You will be making the same request of each subject which 
you use in the practice periods. 
And you are making a commitment 
to each of them to let their purpose be revealed to you, instead of 
placing your own judgment upon them. 


w 28 L 7. 
We will have six two minute practice periods today, in 
which the idea for the day is stated first, and then applied to what¬ 
ever you see in looking about you. 
Not only should the subjects be 
chosen randomly, but each one should be accorded equal sincerity 
as today's idea is applied to it, in an attempt to acknowledge the 
equal value of them all in their contribution to your seeing. 


w 28 L 8. 
As usual, the applications should include the name of the 
subject which your eyes happen to 'light on, and you should rest 
your eyes on it while saying: 

“Above all else, I want to see this _ differently 31 ” 

Each application should be made quite slowly and as thoughtfully 
as possible. 
There is no hurry. 
W(49) 


31 The Urtext manuscript does not have the word “differently” although FIP does. 
We agree with FIP 
that it should be there and deem its omission to be inadvertent. 
It is not in the Notes curiously. 



11-48 


1052 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 29 "God is in everything I see." 

w 29 L l. 
The idea for today explains why you can see all purpose in 
anything. 
It explains why nothing is separate, by itself or in itself. 

And it explains why nothing you see means anything. 
In fact, it ex¬ 
plains every idea we have used thus far, and all subsequent ones as 
well. 
Today's idea is the whole basis for vision. 


W 29 L 2. 
You will probably find this idea very difficult to grasp at 
this point. 
You may find it silly, irreverent, senseless, funny, and 
even objectionable. 
Certainly God is not in a table, for example, as 
you see it. 
Yet we emphasized yesterday that a table shares the 
purpose of the universe. 
And what shares the purpose of the uni¬ 
verse shares the purpose of its Creator. 


W 29 L 3. 
Try then, today, to begin to learn how to look on all things 
with love, appreciation, and open-mindedness. 
You do not see 
them now. 
Would you know what is in them? Nothing is as it ap¬ 
pears to you. 
Its holy purpose stands beyond your little range. 

When vision has shown you the holiness that lights up the world, 
you will understand today's idea perfectly. 
And you will not un¬ 
derstand how you could ever have found it difficult. 


W 29 L 4. 
Our six two minute practice periods for today should fol¬ 
low a now familiar pattern; begin with repeating the idea to your¬ 
self, and then apply it to randomly chosen subjects about you, nam¬ 
ing each one specifically. 
Try to avoid the tendency toward self- 
directed selection, which may be particularly tempting in connec¬ 
tion with today's idea because of its wholly alien nature. 
Remember 
that any order which you impose is equally alien to reality. 


w 29 L 5. 
Your list of subjects should therefore be as free of self¬ 
selection as possible. 
For example, a suitable list might include: 
W(50) 

"God is in this coat hanger ." 

"God is in this magazine." 

"God is in this finger." 

"God is in this lamp." 


1053 


11-49 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


"God is in that body ." 

"God is in that door." 

"God is in that wastebasket." 

w 29 L 6. 
In addition to the assigned practice periods, repeat the idea 
for today at least once an hour, looking slowly about you as you say 
the words unhurriedly to yourself. 
At least once or twice you 
should experience a sense of restfulness as you do this. 
W(5l) 


11-50 


1054 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 30 "God is in everything I see because God is in my 
mind." 

W 30 L 1 . 
The idea for today is the springboard for vision. 
From this 
idea will the world open up before you, and you will look upon it 
and see in it what you have never seen before. 
Nor will what you 
saw before be even faintly visible to you. 


W 30 L 2. 
Today we are trying to use the new kind of projection. 
We 
are not attempting to get rid of what we do not like by seeing it out¬ 
side. 
Instead, we are trying to see in the world what is in our minds, 
and what we want to recognize is there. 
Thus we are trying to join 
with what we see, rather than keeping it apart from us. 
That is the 
fundamental difference between vision and the way you see. 


w 30 L 3. 
Today's idea should be applied as often as possible 
throughout the day. 
Whenever you have a moment or so, repeat it 
to yourself slowly, looking about you, and trying to realize that the 
idea applies to everything you do see now, or could see now if it 
were within the range of your sight. 


W 30 L 4. 
Real vision is not limited to concepts such as "near" and 
"far." To help you begin to get used to this idea, try to think of 
things beyond your present range as well as those you can actually 
see, as you apply today's idea. 
Real vision is not only unlimited by 
space and distance, but it does not depend on the body's eyes at all. 

The mind is its only source. 


W 30 L 5. 
To aid in helping you to become more accustomed to this 
idea as well, devote several practice periods to applying today's idea 
with your eyes closed, using whatever subject comes to mind, and 
looking within rather than without. 
Today's idea applies equally to 
both. 
W(52) 


1055 


11-51 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 31 "I am not the victim of the world I see." 

w 31L l. 
Today's idea is the introduction to your declaration of re¬ 
lease. 
Again, the idea should be applied to both the world you see 
without and the world you see within. 
In applying the idea, we will 
use a form of practice which will be used more and more, with 
changes as indicated. 
Generally speaking, the form includes two 
aspects, one in which you apply the idea on a more sustained basis, 
and the other consisting of frequent applications of the idea 
throughout the day. 


W 31 L 2. 
Two longer periods of practice with the idea for today are 
needed, one in the morning and one at night. 
Three to five minutes 
for each of them is recommended. 
During that time, look about you 
slowly while repeating the idea two or three times. 
Then close your 
eyes and apply the same idea to your inner world. 
You will escape 
from both together, for the inner is the cause of the outer, 
w 31 L 3. 
As you survey your inner world, merely let whatever 
thoughts cross your mind come into your awareness, each to be con¬ 
sidered for a moment and then replaced by the next. 
Try not to es¬ 
tablish any thought of hierarchy among them. 
Watch them come 
and go as dispassionately as possible. 
Do not dwell on any one in 
particular, but try to let the stream move on evenly and calmly, 
without any special investment on your part. 
As you sit and quietly 
watch your thoughts, repeat today's idea to yourself as often as you 
care to, but with no sense of hurry. 


w 31L 4. 
In addition, repeat the idea for today as often as possible 
during the day. 
Remind yourself that you are making a declaration 
of independence in the name of your own freedom. 
And in your 
freedom lies the freedom of the world. 


w 31L 5. 
The idea for today is a particularly useful one to use as a 
response to any form of temptation. 
It is a declaration that you will 
not yield to it and put yourself in bondage. 
W(53) 


11-52 


1056 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 32 "I have invented the world I see." 

W 32 L 1. 
Today we are continuing to develop the theme of cause and 
effect. 
You are not the victim of the world you see because you in¬ 
vented it. 
You can give it up as easily as you made it up. 
You will 
see it or not see it, as you wish. 
While you want it you will see it; 
when you no longer want it, it will not be there for you to see. 

w 32 L 2. 
The idea for today, like the preceding ones, applies to your 
inner and outer worlds, which are actually the same. 
However, 
since you see them as different, the practice periods for today will 
again include two phases, one involving the world you see outside 
you, and the other the world you see in your mind. 
In today's exer¬ 
cises, try to introduce the thought that both are in your own imagi¬ 
nation. 


W 32 L 3. 
Again we will begin the practice periods for the morning 
and evening by repeating the idea for today two or three times, 
while looking around at the world you see as outside yourself. 


Then close your eyes, and look around your inner world. 
Try to 
treat them both as equally as possible. 
Repeat the idea for today 
unhurriedly as often as you wish, as you watch the images which 
your imagination presents to your awareness. 


W 32 L 4. 
For the two longer practice periods, three to five minutes 
are recommended with not less than three required. 
More than five 
can be utilized, if you find the exercises restful. 
To facilitate this, 
select a time when few distractions are anticipated, and when you 
yourself feel reasonably ready. 


w 32 L 5. 
These exercises are also to be continued during the day, as 
often as possible. 
The shorter applications consist of repeating the 
idea slowly, as you survey either your inner or outer world. 
It does 
not matter which you choose. 


W 32 L 6. 
The idea for today should also be applied immediately to 
any situation which may distress you. 
Apply the idea by telling 
yourself: 

"I have invented this situation as I see it. 
" W(54) 


1057 


11-53 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 33 "There is another way of looking at the world." 

W 33 L 1 . 
Today's idea is an attempt to recognize that you can shift 
your perception of the world in both its outer and inner aspects. 
A 
full five minutes should be devoted to the morning and evening ap¬ 
plication. 


w 33 L 2. 
In these practice periods, the idea should be repeated as 
often as you find profitable, though unhurried applications are es¬ 
sential. 
Alternate between surveying your outer and inner percep¬ 
tions, but without an abrupt sense of shifting. 
Merely glance casu¬ 
ally around the world you perceive as outside yourself, then close 
your eyes and survey your inner thoughts with equal casualness. 

Try to remain equally uninvolved in both, and to maintain this de¬ 
tachment as you repeat the idea throughout the day. 


w 33 L 3. 
The shorter exercise periods should be as frequent as pos¬ 
sible. 
Specific applications of today's idea should also be made im¬ 
mediately when any situation arises which tempts you to become 
disturbed. 
For these applications, say: 

"There is another way of looking at this." 
w 33 L 4. 
Remember to apply today's idea the instant you are aware 
of distress. 
It may be necessary to take a minute or so to sit quietly 
and repeat the idea to yourself several 32 times. 
Closing your eyes 
will probably help in this form of application. 
W(55) 


32 Urtext manuscript has “separate” in this spot. 
It’s being assessed as a typo. 
FIP changes it as we do. 

The Notes uses an abbreviation “sev.” which is likely meant to be “separate.” 


11-54 


1058 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 34 "I could see peace instead of this." 

w 34 L l. 
The idea for today begins to describe the conditions which 
prevail in the other way of seeing. 
Peace of mind is clearly an inter¬ 
nal matter. 
It must begin with your own thoughts, and then extend 
outward. 
It is from your peace of mind that a peaceful perception of 
the world arises. 


w 34 L 2. 
Three longer practice periods are required for today's exer¬ 
cises. 
One in the morning and one in the evening is advised, with 
an additional one to be undertaken at any time in between which 
seems most conducive to readiness. 
All applications should be done 
with your eyes closed. 
It is your inner world to which the applica¬ 
tions of today's idea should be made. 


W 34 L 3. 
Some five minutes of mind-searching are required for each 
of the longer practice periods. 
Search your mind for fear thoughts, 
anxiety provoking situations, "offending" personalities or events, or 
anything else about which you are harboring unloving thoughts. 

Note each one casually, repeating the idea for today slowly, as you 
watch them arise in your mind, and let each one go to be replaced 
by the next. 


W 34 L 4. 
If you begin to experience difficulty in thinking of specific 
subjects, continue to repeat the idea to yourself in an unhurried 
manner, without applying it to anything in particular. 
Be sure, 
however, not to make any specific exclusions. 


W 34 L 5. 
The shorter applications are to be frequent, and made 
whenever you feel your peace of mind is threatened in any way. 


The purpose is to protect yourself from temptation throughout the 
day. 
If a specific form of temptation arises in your awareness, the 
exercise should take this form: 

"I could see peace in this situation instead of what I now see in it." 

If the inroads on your peace of mind take the form of more general¬ 
ized adverse emotions, such as depression, anxiety or worry, use the 
idea in its original form. 
W(56) 


1059 


11-55 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


W 34 L 6. 
If you find you need more than one application of today's 
idea to help you change your mind in any specific context, try to 
take several minutes and devote them to repeating the idea until 
you feel some sense of relief. 
It will help you if you tell yourself 
specifically: 

"I can replace my feelings of depression, anxiety, or worry (or 
my thoughts about this situation, personality, or event) with 
peace." W(57) 


11-56 


1060 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 35 "My mind is part of God's. 
I am very holy." 

w 35 L l. 
Today's idea does not describe the way you see yourself 
now. 
It does, however, describe what vision will show you. 
It is 
difficult for anyone who thinks he is in this world to believe this of 
himself. 
Yet the reason he thinks he is in this world is because he 
does not believe it. 


w 35 L 2. 
You will believe that you are part of where you think you 
are. 
That is because you surround yourself with the environment 
you want. 
And you want it to protect the image of yourself which 
you have made. 
The image is part of it. 
33 What you see while you 
believe you are in it is seen through the eyes of the image. 
It 34 is not 
vision. 
Images cannot see. 


w 35 L 3. 
The idea for today presents a very different view of your¬ 
self. 
By establishing your Source it establishes your identity, and it 
describes you as you must really be in truth. 
We will use a some¬ 
what different kind of application for today's idea, because the em¬ 
phasis for today is on the perceiver, rather than on what he per¬ 
ceives. 


W 35 L 4. 
For each of the three five-minute practice periods today, 
begin by repeating today's idea to yourself, and then close your eyes 
and search your mind for the various kinds of descriptive terms in 
which you see yourself. 
Include all of the ego-based attributes 
which you ascribe to yourself, positive or negative, desirable or un¬ 
desirable, grandiose or debased. 
All of them are equally unreal be¬ 
cause you do not look upon yourself through the eyes of holiness. 


W 35 L 5. 
In the earlier part of the mind-searching period, you will 
probably emphasize what you consider to be the more negative as¬ 
pects of your perception of yourself. 
Toward the latter part of the 
exercise period, however, more self-inflating descriptive terms may 
well cross your mind. 
Try to recognize that the direction of your 


” Handwritten mark-up suggests (this environment). 

’ 4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (This). 



1061 


11-57 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


fantasies about yourself does not matter. 
Illusions have no direction 
in reality. 
They are merely not true. 
W(58) 

w 35 L 6. 
A suitable unselected list for applying the idea for today 
might be as follows: 

"I see myself as imposed on." 

"I see myself as depressed.'' 

"I see myself as failing." 

"I see myself as endangered." 

"I see myself as helpless." 

"I see myself as victorious." 

"I see myself as losing out." 

"I see myself as charitable." 

"I see myself as virtuous." 

W 35 L 7. 
You should not think of these terms in an abstract way. 

They will occur to you as various situations, personalities, and 
events in which you figure cross your mind. 
Pick up any specific 
situation that occurs to you, identify the descriptive term or terms 
which you feel are applicable to your reactions to that situation, and 
use them in applying today's idea. 
After you have named each one. 



add: 


"But my mind is part of God’s. 
I am very holy." 
w 35 L 8. 
During the longer exercise periods, there will probably be 
intervals in which nothing specific occurs to you. 
Do not strain to 
think up specific things to fill the interval, but merely relax and re¬ 
peat today's idea slowly until something occurs to you. 
Although 
nothing that does occur should be omitted from the exercises, noth¬ 
ing should be "dug out" with effort. 
Neither force nor discrimina¬ 
tion should be used. 


w 35 L 9. 
As often as possible during the day, pick up a specific at¬ 
tribute or attributes which you are ascribing to yourself at the time, 
and apply the idea for today to them, adding the idea to each of 
them in the form stated above. 
If nothing particular occurs to you, 
merely repeat the idea to yourself, with closed eyes. 
W(59) 


11-58 


1062 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 36 "My holiness envelops everything I see." 

W 36 L 1 . 
Today's idea extends the idea for yesterday from the per- 
ceiver to the perceived. 
You are holy because your mind is part of 
God's. 
And because you are holy, your sight must be holy as well. 

"Sinless" means without sin. 
You cannot be without sin a little. 


You are sinless or not. 
If your mind is part of God's you must be 
sinless, or a part of His Mind would be sinful. 
Your sight is related 
to His holiness, not to your ego and therefore not to your body. 


W 36 L 2. 
Four three to five minute practice periods are required for 
today. 
Try to distribute them fairly evenly, and make the shorter 
application frequently, to protect your protection throughout the 
day. 
The longer practice periods should take this form: 

w 36 L 3. 
First, close your eyes and repeat the idea for today several 
times slowly. 
Then open your eyes and look quite slowly about 
you, applying the idea specifically to whatever you note in your 
casual survey. 
Say, for example: 

"My holiness envelops that mg." 

"My holiness envelops that wall." 

"My holiness envelops these fingers." 

"My holiness envelops that chair." 

"My holiness envelops that body." 

"My holiness envelops this pen." 

Several times during these practice periods, close your eyes and re¬ 
peat the idea to yourself. 
Then open your eyes and continue as be¬ 
fore. 


w 36 L 4. 
For the shorter exercise periods, close your eyes and repeat 
the idea; look about you as you repeat it again; and conclude with 
one more repetition with your eyes closed. 
All applications should, 
of course, be made quite slowly, as effortlessly and unhurriedly as 
possible. 
W(60) 


1063 


11-59 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 37 "My holiness blesses the world." 

W 37 L 1 . 
This idea contains the first glimmerings of your true func¬ 
tion in the world, or why you are here. 
Your purpose is to see the 
world through your own holiness. 
Thus are you and the world 
blessed together. 
No-one loses; nothing is taken away from anyone; 
everyone gains through your holy vision. 
It signifies the end of sac¬ 
rifice, because it offers everyone his full due. 
And he is entitled to 
everything, because it is his birthright as a Son of God. 

w 37 L 2. 
There is no other way in which the idea of sacrifice can be 
removed from the world's thinking. 
Any other way of seeing will 
inevitably demand payment of someone or something. 
As a result, 
the perceiver will lose. 
Nor will he have any idea why he is losing. 

Yet is his wholeness restored to his awareness through your vision. 

Your holiness blesses him by asking nothing of him. 
Those who see 
themselves as whole make no demands. 


w 37 L 3. 
Your holiness is the salvation of the world. 
It lets you teach 
the world that it is one with you, not by preaching to it, not by tell¬ 
ing it anything, but merely by your quiet recognition that in your 
holiness are all things blessed, along with you. 

w 37 L 4. 
Today's four longer exercise periods, each to involve three 
to five minutes of practice, begin with the repetition of the idea for 
today, followed by a minute or so of looking about you as you apply 
the idea to whatever you see: 

"My holiness blesses this chair." 

"My holiness blesses that window." 

"My holiness blesses this body." 

Then close your eyes and apply the idea to any person who occurs 
to you, using his name and saying: 

"My holiness blesses yon, (name)" W(6i) 
w 37 L 5. 
You may continue the practice period with your eyes 
closed; you may open your eyes again and apply the idea for today 
to your outer world if you so desire; you may alternate between ap- 


11-60 


1064 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


plying it 35 to what you see around you and to those who are in your 
thoughts; or you may use any combination of these two phases of 
application which you prefer. 
The practice period should conclude 
with a repetition of the idea made with your eyes closed, and an¬ 
other, following immediately, made with your eyes open. 


w 37 L 6. 
The shorter exercises consist of repeating the idea as often 
as you can. 
It is particularly helpful to apply it silently to anyone 
you meet, using his name as you do so. 
It is essential to use the 
idea if anyone seems to cause an adverse reaction in you. 
Offer him 
the blessing of your holiness immediately, that you may learn to 
keep it in your own awareness. 
W(62) 


35 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the idea). 



1065 


11-61 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 38 "There is nothing my holiness cannot do." 

w 38 L l. 
Your holiness reverses all the laws of the world. 
It is be¬ 
yond every restriction of time, space, distance, and limits of any 
kind. 
Your holiness is totally unlimited in its power because it es¬ 
tablishes you as a Son of God, at one with the Mind of his Creator. 

Through your holiness the power of God is made manifest. 


Through your holiness the power of God is made available. 
And 
there is nothing the power of God cannot do. 


W 38 L 2. 
Your holiness, then, can remove all pain, can end all sor¬ 
row, and can solve all problems. 
It can do so in connection with 
yourself and with anyone else. 
It is equal in its power to help any¬ 
one, because it is equal in its power to save anyone. 
If you are holy, 
so is everything God created. 
You are holy because all things He 
created are holy, and all things He created are holy because you are. 

w 38 L 3. 
In today's exercises, we will apply the power of your holi¬ 
ness to all problems, difficulties, or suffering in any form that you 
happen to think of in yourself or someone 36 else. 
We will make no 
distinctions because there are no distinctions. 


w 38 L 4. 
In the four longer practice periods, each preferably to last a 
full five minutes, repeat the idea for today, close your eyes, and then 
search your mind for any sense of loss or unhappiness of any kind, 
as you see it. 
Try to make as little distinction as possible between a 
situation that is difficult for you and one that is difficult for someone 
else. 
Identify the situation specifically, and also name the person 
concerned. 
Use this form in applying the idea for today: 

"In the situation involving _ in which I see myself, there is nothing 

that my holiness cannot do." 

"In the situation involving_in which_sees himself, there is 

nothing my holiness cannot do." W(63) 


36 Handwritten mark-up suggests (in anyone). 



11-62 


1066 


PROOF 


COPY 






Volume II Workbook 


W 38 L 5. 
From time to time you may want to vary this procedure, 
and add some relevant thoughts of your own. 
You might like, for 
example, to include thoughts such as: 

"There is nothing my holiness cannot do because the power of God lies 


in it. 



Introduce whatever variations appeal to you, but keep the exercises 
focused on the theme 

“There is nothing your 37 holiness cannot do. 
” 

The purpose of today's exercises is to begin to instill in you a sense 
that you have dominion over all things because of what you are. 
38 

W 38 L 6. 
In the frequent shorter applications, apply the idea in its 
original form unless a specific problem concerning you or someone 
else arises, or comes to mind. 
In that event, use the more specific 
form of application. 
W(64) 


’ 7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (my). 


’ 8 Genesis 1:28 Then God blessed them, and God said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply; fill the earth 
and subdue it; have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over every living 
thing that moves on the earth.” 


1067 


11-63 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 39 "My holiness is my salvation." 

w 39 L l. 
If guilt is hell, what is its opposite? Like the text for which 
this workbook was written, the ideas which are used for these exer¬ 
cises are very simple, very clear, and totally unambiguous. 
We are 
not concerned with intellectual feats nor logical toys. 
We are deal¬ 
ing only in the very obvious, which has been overlooked in the 
clouds of complexity in which you think you think. 


W 39 L 2. 
If guilt is hell, what is its opposite? This is not difficult, 
surely. 
The hesitation you may feel in answering is not due to the 
ambiguity of the question. 
But do you believe that guilt is hell? If 
you did, you would see at once how direct and simple the text is, 
and you would not need a workbook at all. 
No-one needs practice 
to gain what is already his. 


W 39 L 3. 
We have already said that your holiness is the salvation of 
the world. 
What about your own salvation? You cannot give what 
you do not have. 
A Savior must be saved. 
How else can he teach 
salvation? Today's exercises will apply to you alone, recognizing 
that your salvation is crucial to the salvation of the world. 
As you 
apply the exercises to your own world, the whole world stands to 
benefit. 


W 39 L 4. 
Your holiness is the answer to every question that was ever 
asked, is being asked now, or will be asked in the future. 
Your holi¬ 
ness means the end of guilt, and therefore the end of hell. 
Your ho¬ 
liness is the salvation of the world, and your own. 
How could you 
to whom your holiness belongs be excluded from it? God does not 
know unholiness. 
Can it be He does not know His Son? 

w 39 L 5. 
A full five minutes are urged 39 for the four longer practice 
periods for today. 
40 Longer and more frequent practice sessions are 
encouraged . 
41 If you want to exceed the minimum requirements 


,fl Handwritten mark-up suggests (required). 


40 Handwritten mark-up suggests (and). 


41 Handwritten mark-up suggests (urged). 



11-64 


1068 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


more rather than longer sessions are recommended, although both 
are encouraged. 
W(65) 

w 39 L 6. 
Begin the practice periods as usual, by repeating today's 
idea to yourself. 
Then, with closed eyes, search out your unloving 
thoughts in whatever form they appear; uneasiness, depression, an¬ 
ger, fear, worry, attack, insecurity, and so on. 
Whatever form they 
take they are unloving and therefore fearful. 
And so it is from them 
that you need to be saved. 


w 39 L 7. 
Specific situations, events or personalities you associate 
with unloving thoughts of any kind are suitable subjects for today's 
exercises. 
It is imperative for your own salvation that you see them 
differently. 
And it is your blessing on them that will save you and 
give you vision. 


W 39 L 8. 
Slowly, without conscious selection and without undue 
emphasis on any one in particular, search your mind for every 
thought that stands between you and your salvation. 
Apply the 
idea for today to each one of them in this way: 

"My unloving thoughts about _ are keeping me in hell. 
My holi¬ 

ness is my salvation." 

w 39 L 9. 
You may find these sessions 42 easier if you intersperse the 
applications 43 with several short periods during which you merely 
repeat today's idea to yourself slowly a few times. 
You may also 
find it helpful to include a few short intervals in which you just re¬ 
lax and do not seem to be thinking of anything. 
Sustained concen¬ 
tration is very difficult at first. 
It will become much easier as your 
mind becomes more disciplined and less distractible. 

w 39 L 10 . 
Meanwhile, you should feel free to introduce variety into 
your application 44 periods, in whatever form appeals to you. 
Do 
not, however, change the idea itself in varying the method of apply¬ 
ing it. 
However you elect to use it, the idea should be stated so that 


42 Handwritten mark-up suggests (practice periods). 


43 Handwritten mark-up suggests (them). 


44 Handwritten mark-up suggests (practice). 



1069 


11-65 


PROOF 


COPY 




Part 1 


its meaning remains 45 that your holiness is your salvation. 
End each 
practice period by repeating the idea in its original form once more, 
and adding: 

“If guilt is hell, what is its opposite? ” W(66) 

In the shorter applications, which should be made some three or 
four times an hour and more if possible, you may ask yourself this 
question, repeat today's idea, or preferably both. 
If temptations 
arise, a particularly helpful form of the idea is: 

"My holiness is my salvation from this." W(67) 


Handwritten mark-up suggests (explanation is the fact). 



11-66 


1070 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 40 "I am blessed as a Son of God." 

W 40 L 1. 
Today we will begin to assert 46 some of the happy things to 
which you are entitled, being what you are. 
No long practice peri¬ 
ods are required today, but very frequent short ones are necessary. 

Once every ten minutes would be highly desirable, and you are 
urged to attempt this and to adhere to this schedule whenever pos¬ 
sible. 
If you forget, try again. 
If there are long interruptions, try 
again. 
Whenever you remember, try again. 


w 40 L 2. 
You need not close your eyes for the exercise periods, al¬ 
though you will probably find it more helpful if you do. 
However, 
you may be in a number of situations during the day when closing 
your eyes would not be appropriate. 
Do not miss a practice period 
because of this. 
You can practice quite well under almost any cir¬ 
cumstance, if you really want to. 


w 40 L 3. 
Today's exercises take little time and no effort. 
Repeat to¬ 
day's idea, and then add several of the attributes which you associ¬ 
ate with being a Son of God, applying them to yourself. 
One prac¬ 
tice period might, for example, consist of the following: 

"I am blessed as a Son of God. 


I am happy, peaceful, loving and contented." 

Another might be something as follows: 

"I am blessed as a Son of God. 


I am calm, quiet, assured and confident." 

If only a brief period is available, merely telling yourself that you 
are blessed as a Son of God will do. 
W(68) 


411 Originally in the Urtext manuscript the word “insert” was typed, handwriting suggests (assert), which 
appears to be a genuine correction. 



1071 


11-67 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 41 "God goes with me wherever I go." 

w 41L l. 
Today's idea will eventually overcome completely the 
sense of loneliness and abandonment which all the separated ones 
experience. 
Depression is an inevitable consequence of separation. 

So are anxiety, worry, a deep sense of helplessness, misery, suffer¬ 
ing, and intense fear of loss. 


W 41 L 2. 
The separated ones have invented many "cures" for what 
they believe to be the "ills of the world." But the one thing they do 
not do is to question the reality of the problem. 
Yet its effects cannot 
be cured because it is not real. 


The idea for today has the power to end all this foolishness forever. 

And foolishness it is, despite the serious and tragic forms it may 
take. 


W 41 L 3. 
Deep within you is everything that is perfect, ready to radi¬ 
ate through you and out into the whole world. 
It will cure all sor¬ 
row and pain and fear and loss because it will heal the mind that 
thought these things were real, and suffered out of its allegiance to 
these beliefs. 


w 41 L 4. 
You can never be deprived of your perfect holiness because 
its Source goes with you wherever you go. 
You can never suffer be¬ 
cause the Source of all joy goes with you wherever you go. 
You can 
never be alone because the Source of all life goes with you wherever 
you go. 
Nothing can destroy your peace of mind because God goes 
with you wherever you go. 


w 41 L 5. 
We understand that you do not believe all this. 
How could 
you, when the truth is hidden deep within, under a heavy cloud of 
insane thoughts, dense and obscuring, yet representing all you see? 
w 41L 6. 
Today we will make our first real attempt to get past this 
dark and heavy cloud, and to go through it to the light beyond. 


W(69) There will be only one long practice period today. 
In the 
morning, as soon as you get up if possible, sit quietly for some three 


11-68 


1072 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


to five minutes with your eyes closed. 
At the beginning of this 47 
practice period, repeat today's idea very slowly. 
Then make no ef¬ 
fort to think of anything. 
Try, instead, to get a sense of turning in¬ 
ward, past all the idle thoughts of the world. 
Try to enter very 
deeply into your own mind, keeping it clear of any thoughts that 
might divert your attention. 


w 41 L 7. 
From time to time you may repeat today's 48 idea, if you find 
it helpful. 
But most of all, try to sink down and inward, away from 
the world and all the foolish thoughts of the world. 
You are trying 
to reach past all these things. 
You are trying to leave appearances 
and approach reality. 


w 41 L 8. 
It is quite possible to reach God. 
In fact it is very easy, be¬ 
cause it is the most natural thing in the world. 
You might even say 
it is the only natural thing in the world. 
The way will open if you 
believe that it is possible. 
This exercise can bring very startling re¬ 
sults even the first time it is attempted, and 49 sooner or later it is al¬ 
ways successful. 
We will go into more detail in connection with this 
kind of practice as we go along. 
But it will never fail completely, 
and instant success is possible. 


w 41L 9. 
Throughout the day use today's idea often, repeating it 
very slowly, and preferably with eyes closed. 
Think of what you are 
saying; what the words mean. 
Concentrate on the holiness which 
they imply about you; on the unfailing companionship which is 
yours; on the complete protection that surrounds you. 


W 41 L 10. 
You can indeed afford to laugh at fear thoughts, remem¬ 
bering that God goes with you wherever you go. 
W(70) 


47 Originally in the Urtext manuscript "a” is typed. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests (this) which appears 
to be correct. 


48 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 


49 Originally in the Urtext manuscript there is a sentence break here. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests 
comma instead of period, and that is better. 



1073 


11-69 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 42 "God is my strength. 
Vision is His gift." 

w 42 L l. 
The idea for today combines two very powerful thoughts, 
both of major importance. 
It also sets forth a cause and effect rela¬ 
tionship which explains why you cannot fail in your efforts to 
achieve the goal of the course. 
You will see because it is the Will of 
God. 
It is His strength, not your own, that gives you power. 
And it 
is His gift to you, rather than your own, which offers vision to you. 

W 42 L 2. 
God is indeed your strength, and 50 what He gives is truly 
given. 
This means that you can receive it any time and anywhere, 
wherever you are and in whatever circumstances you find yourself. 

Your passage through time and space is not random. 
You cannot 
but be in the right place at the right time. 
Such is the strength of 
God. 
Such are His gifts. 


w 42 L 3. 
We will have two three-to-five-minute longer exercise peri¬ 
ods today, one as soon as possible after you wake, and another as 
close as possible to the time you go to sleep. 
It is better, however, to 
wait until you can sit quietly by yourself at a time when you feel 
ready, than it is to be concerned with the time as such. 


w 42 L 4. 
Begin the longer 51 practice period by repeating the idea for 
today slowly, with eyes open, looking about you. 
Then close your 
eyes and repeat the idea again, quite slowly. 
After this, try to think 
of nothing except thoughts which occur to you in relation to today's 
idea. 
You might think, for example: 

"Vision must be possible. 
God gives truly." 
or, 

" God’s gifts to me must be mine because He gave them to me." 
Whatever 52 thought that is clearly related to the idea itself is suit¬ 


able. 



50 Originally in the Urtext manuscript two sentences, the comma is handwritten in, and appears to be an 
improvement. 


51 The word (longer) is handwritten and appears to be a suitable correction. 


52 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Any). 



11-70 


1074 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 42 L 5. 
You may, in fact, be astonished at the amount of course- 
related understanding some of your own thoughts contain. 
Let 
them come without censoring unless you realize that your mind is 
merely wandering, and you have let obviously irrelevant thoughts 
W(7l) intrude. 
You may also reach a point where no thoughts at all 
seem to come to mind. 
If such interferences occur, open your eyes 
and repeat the thought once more while looking slowly about; close 
your eyes, repeat the idea once more, and then continue to look for 
related thoughts in your mind. 


w 42 L 6. 
Remember, though, that active searching 53 is not appropri¬ 
ate for today's exercises. 
Try merely to step back and let the 
thoughts come. 
If you find this difficult, it is better to spend the 
practice period alternating between slow repetitions of the idea with 
eyes open, then 54 closed, then 55 open, and so on than it is to strain in 
order to find suitable thoughts. 


W 42 L 7. 
There is no limit on the number of short practice periods 
which would be most beneficial. 
The idea for today is a beginning 
step in bringing thoughts together and teaching you that what you 
are studying is a unified thought system in which nothing is lacking 
that is needed, and nothing is included that is contradictory or ir¬ 
relevant. 
The more often you repeat 56 the idea during the day, the 
more often you will be reminding yourself that the goal of the 
course is important to you, and that you have not forgotten it. 
W(72) 


53 Handwritten mark-up suggests (for relevant thoughts). 


54 Handwritten mark-up suggests (eyes). 


55 Handwritten mark-up suggests (eyes). 


56 Handwritten mark-up suggests (use). 



1075 


11-71 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 43 "God is my Source. 
I cannot see apart from Him." 

W 43 L l. 
Perception is not an attribute of God. 
His is the realm of 
knowledge. 
Yet He has created the Holy Spirit as the Mediator be¬ 
tween perception and knowledge. 
Without this link with God, per¬ 
ception would have replaced knowledge forever in your minds. 

With this link with God, perception will become so changed and 
purified that it will lead to knowledge. 
That is its function as the 
Holy Spirit sees it. 
Therefore, that is its function in truth, 
w 43 L 2. 
In God you cannot see. 
Perception has no function in God, 
and does not exist. 
Yet in salvation, which is the undoing of what 
never was, perception has a mighty purpose. 
Made by the Son of 
God for an unholy purpose, it must become the means for the resto¬ 
ration of his holiness to his awareness. 
Perception has no meaning. 

Yet does the Holy Spirit give it a meaning very close to God's. 

Healed perception becomes the means by which the Son of God for¬ 
gives his brother and thus forgives himself. 


w 43 L 3. 
You cannot see apart from God because you cannot be 
apart from God. 
Whatever you do you do in Him, because what¬ 
ever you think you think with His Mind. 
If vision is real, and it is 
real to the extent to which it shares the Holy Spirit's purpose, then 
you cannot see apart from God. 


W 43 L 4. 
Three five-minute practice periods are required today, one 
as early as possible and another as late as possible. 
57 The third may 
be undertaken at the most convenient and suitable time which cir¬ 
cumstances and readiness permit. 
At the beginning of the 58 practice 
period, 59 repeat the idea 60 to yourself with your eyes open. 
Then 
glance around you for a short time, applying today's idea specifi¬ 
cally to what you see. 
Four or five subjects for this phase of the ex¬ 
ercise are sufficient. 
You might say, for example: 

“God is my Source. 
I cannot see this desk apart from Him. 
” 


37 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one as early and one as late as possible). 


58 Handwritten mark-up suggests (these). 


59 Handwritten mark-up suggests (s). 


60 Handwritten mark-up suggests (for today). 



11-72 


1076 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


“God is my Source. 
I cannot see that picture apart from Him. 
” 


w 43 L 5. 
Although this part of the exercise period should be rela¬ 
tively short, be sure that you select the subjects for this phase indis¬ 
criminately, without self-directed inclusion or exclusion. 
W(73) For 
the second and longer phase of the exercise period, close your eyes, 
repeat today's idea again, and then let whatever relevant thoughts 
occur to you add to the idea in your own personal way. 
Thoughts 
such as: 

"I see through the eyes of forgiveness," 

"I see the world as blessed," 

"The world can show me myself/' 

"I see my own thoughts, which are like God's," 
or any thought related more or less directly to today's idea is suit¬ 
able. 
The thoughts need not bear an obvious relationship to the 
idea, but they should not be in opposition to it. 


W 43 L 6. 
If you should find your mind wandering; if you begin to be 
aware of thoughts which are clearly out of accord with today's idea; 
or if you seem to be unable to think of anything, open your eyes, 
repeat the first phase; and then try the second phase again. 
Do not 
allow any protracted period to occur in which you become preoccu¬ 
pied with irrelevant thoughts. 
Return to the first phase as often as 
necessary to prevent this. 


W 43 L 7. 
In applying today's idea in the shorter practice periods, the 
form may vary according to the circumstances and situations in 
which you find yourself during the day. 
When you are with some¬ 
one else, for example, try to remember to tell him silently: 

"God is my Source. 
I cannot see you apart from Him." 

This form is equally applicable to strangers and to those you know 
well. 
61 Try, in fact, not to make distinctions of this kind at all. 


w 43 L 8. 
The 62 idea should also be applied throughout the day to 
various situations and events which may occur, particularly those 


M Handwritten mark-up suggests (as it is to those you think are closer to you). 

I: Handwritten mark-up suggests (Today's). 



1077 


11-73 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


which distress you in any way. 
For this kind of application, use this 
form: 

"God is my Source. 
I cannot see this apart from Him." 

If no particular subject presents itself to your awareness, 63 merely 
repeat the idea in its original form. 
W(74) 

W 43 L 9. 
Try today not to allow long periods of time to slip by with¬ 
out remembering today's idea, and thus remembering your func¬ 
tion. 
W(75) 


63 Handwritten mark-up suggests (at the time). 



11-74 


1078 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 44 "God is the Light in which I see." 

W 44 L 1. 
Today we are continuing with the idea for yesterday, add¬ 
ing another dimension to it. 
You cannot see in darkness, and you 
cannot make light. 
You can make darkness and then think you see 
in it, but light reflects life, and is therefore an aspect of creation. 

Creation and darkness cannot coexist, but light and life must go to¬ 
gether, being but different aspects of creation. 


W 44 L 2. 
In order to see, one 64 must recognize that light is within, not 
without. 
You do not see outside yourself. 
Nor is the equipment for 
seeing outside you. 
An essential part of this equipment is the light 
which makes seeing possible. 
It is with you always, making vision 
possible in every circumstance. 


W 44 L 3. 
Today we are going to attempt to reach that light. 
For 
that 65 purpose, we will use a form of practice which has been sug¬ 
gested once before, and which we will utilize increasingly. 
It is a 
particularly difficult form for the undisciplined mind because it 66 
represents a major goal of mind training. 
It embodies precisely 
what the untrained mind lacks. 
Yet the training must be accom¬ 
plished if you are to see. 


w 44 L 4. 
Have at least three practice periods today, each lasting 
three-to-five minutes. 
A longer time 67 is highly recommended, but 
only if you find the time merely slipping by with little or no sense of 
strain. 
The form of exercise we will use today is the most natural 
and easy one in the world for the trained mind, just as it seems to be 
the most unnatural and difficult for the untrained mind. 


W 44 L 5. 
Your mind is no longer wholly untrained. 
You are quite 
ready to learn the form of exercise we will use today, but you may 
find that you will encounter strong resistance. 
The reason is very 
simple. 
While you practice in this form, 68 you leave behind every- 


111 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


65 Handwritten mark-up suggests (this). 


66 Handwritten mark-up suggests (and) in place of “because it” 

67 Handwritten mark-up suggests (period). 


68 Handwritten mark-up suggests (way). 



1079 


11-75 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


thing that you now believe, and all the thoughts which you have 
made up. 
Properly speaking, this is the release from hell. 
Perceived 

through the ego's eyes, it is loss of identity and a descent into hell. 

W(76) 

w 44 L 6. 
If you can stand aside from the ego 69 ever so little, you will 
have no difficulty in recognizing that its opposition and fears are 
meaningless. 
You might find it helpful to remind yourself from 
time to time that to reach light is to escape from darkness, whatever 
you may believe to the contrary. 
God is the Light in which you see. 

You are attempting to reach Him. 


w 44 L 7. 
Begin the practice period by repeating today's idea with 
your eyes open, and close them slowly, repeating the idea several 
times more. 
Then try to sink into your mind, letting go every kind 
of interference and intrusions by quietly sinking past them. 
Your 
mind cannot be stopped in this unless you choose to stop it. 
It is 
merely taking its natural course. 
Try to observe your passing 
thoughts without involvement, and slip quietly by them. 


W 44 L 8. 
While no particular form of approach is advocated, what is 
needful is a sense of the importance of what you are doing, its ines¬ 
timable value to you, and an awareness that you are attempting 
something very holy. 
Salvation is your happiest accomplishment. 
It 
is also the only one that has any meaning, because it is the only one 
that has any use to you at all. 


W 44 L 9. 
If resistance rises in any form, pause long enough to repeat 
today's idea, keeping your eyes closed unless you are aware of fear. 

In that case, you will probably find it more reassuring to open your 
eyes briefly. 
Try, however, to return to the exercises as soon as pos¬ 
sible. 


w 44 L 10 . 
If you are doing the exercises correctly, you should experi¬ 
ence some sense of relaxation, and even a feeling that you are ap¬ 
proaching, if not actually entering into light. 
Try to think of light, 
formless and without limit, as you pass by the thoughts of this 


, ’ fl Handwritten mark-up suggests (by). 



11-76 


1080 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


world. 
And do not forget that they cannot hold you to the world 
unless you give them the power to do so. 
W(77) 

w 44 L 11. 
Throughout the day, repeat the idea often, with eyes open 
or closed as seems better to you at the time. 
Do not forget. 
Above 
all, be determined not to forget today. 
W(78) 


1081 


11-77 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 45 "God is the Mind with which I think." 

w 45 L l. 
Today's idea holds the key to what your real thoughts are. 

They are nothing that you think you think, just as nothing that you 
think you see is related to vision in any way. 
There is no relation¬ 
ship between what is real and what you think is real. 
Nothing that 
you think are your real thoughts resemble your real thoughts in any 
respect. 
Nothing that you think you see bears any resemblance to 
what vision will show you. 


w 45 L 2. 
You think with the Mind of God. 
Therefore you share your 
thoughts with Him, as He shares His with you. 
They are the same 
thoughts, because they are thought by the same Mind. 
To share is to 
make alike, or to make one. 
Nor do the thoughts you think with the 
Mind of God leave your mind, because thoughts do not leave their 
source. 
Therefore your thoughts are in the Mind of God, as you are. 

They are in your mind as well, where He is. 
As you are part of His 
Mind, so are your thoughts part of His Thoughts, 
w 45 L 3. 
Where, then, are your real thoughts? Today we will at¬ 
tempt to reach them. 
We will have to look for them in your mind, 
because that is where they are. 
They must still be there because they 
cannot have left. 
What is thought by the Mind of God is eternal, be¬ 
ing part of creation. 


w 45 L 4. 
Our three five-minute practice periods for today will take 
the same general form that we used in applying yesterday's idea. 


We will attempt to leave the unreal and seek for the real. 
We will 
deny the world in favor of truth. 
We will not let the thoughts of the 
world hold us back, and 70 we will not let the beliefs of the world tell 
us that what God would have us do is impossible. 


W 45 L 5. 
Instead, we will try to recognize that only what God would 
have us do is possible. 
We will also try to understand that only 
what God would have us do is what we want to do. 
And we will 
also try to remember that we cannot fail in doing what He would 


70 Handwritten editing deletes “and” and begins new sentence with “We will not ...” 


11-78 


1082 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


have us do. 
There is every reason to feel confident that you will 
succeed today. 
It is the Will of God. 
W(79) 

w 45 L 6. 
Begin the exercises for today by repeating the idea to your¬ 
self, closing your eyes as you do so. 
Spend a fairly short period in 
thinking a few relevant thoughts of your own, keeping the idea in 
mind as you do so. 
After you have added some four or five 
thoughts of your own, repeat the idea again, and tell yourself gently: 

"My real thoughts are in my mind. 
I would like to find them." 

Then try to go past all the unreal thoughts which cover the truth in 
your mind, and reach to the eternal. 
Under all the senseless 
thoughts and mad ideas with which you have cluttered up your 
mind are the thoughts which you thought with God in the begin¬ 
ning. 
They are there in your mind now, completely unchanged. 

They will always be in your mind, exactly as they always were. 


W 45 L 7. 
Everything that you have thought since then will change, 
but the foundation on which they rest is wholly changeless. 
It is this 
foundation toward which the exercises for today are directed. 
Here 
is your mind joined with the Mind of God. 
Here are your thoughts 
one with His. 


W 45 L 8. 
For this kind of practice only one thing is necessary; ap¬ 
proach it as you would an altar dedicated in Heaven itself to God 
the Father and God the Son. 
For such is the place you are trying to 
reach. 
You will probably be unable as yet to realize how high you 
are trying to go. 
Yet even with the little understanding you have 
already gained, you should be able to remind yourself that this is no 
idle game, but an exercise in holiness and an attempt to reach the 
Kingdom of Heaven. 


W 45 L 9. 
In using the shorter form for applying today's idea, try to 
remember how important it is to you to understand the holiness of 
the mind that thinks with God. 
Take a minute or two, as you repeat 
the idea throughout the day, to appreciate your mind's holiness. 

Stand aside, however briefly, W(80) from all thoughts that are unwor¬ 
thy of Him Whose host you are. 
And thank Him for the thoughts 
He is thinking with you. 
W(81) 


1083 


11-79 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 46 "God is the Love in which I forgive." 

w 46 L l. 
God does not forgive because He has never condemned. 

And there must be condemnation before forgiveness is necessary. 

Forgiveness is the great need of this world, but that is because it is a 
world of illusions. 
Those who forgive are thus releasing themselves 
from illusions, while those who withhold forgiveness are binding 
themselves to them. 
As you condemn only yourself, so do you for¬ 
give only yourself. 
71 

w 46 L 2. 
72 Although God does not forgive. 
His Love is nevertheless 
the basis of forgiveness. 
Fear condemns and love forgives. 
For¬ 
giveness thus undoes what fear has produced, returning the mind to 
the awareness of God. 
For this reason, forgiveness can truly be 
called salvation. 
It is the means by which illusions disappear. 


w 46 L 3. 
Today's exercises require at least three full five-minute 
practice periods, and as many shorter applications 73 as possible. 
Be¬ 
gin the 74 practice periods by repeating today's idea to yourself, as 
usual. 
Close your eyes as you do so, and spend a minute or two in 
searching your mind for those whom you have not forgiven. 
It does 
not matter "how much" you have not forgiven. 
75 You have forgiven 
them entirely or not at all. 


w 46 L 4. 
If you are doing the exercises well, you should have no dif¬ 
ficulty in finding a number of people you have not forgiven. 
It is a 
safe rule that anyone you do not like is a suitable subject. 
Mention 
each one by name, and say: 

"God is the Love in which I forgive yon, (name)" 


71 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 

John 20:23 If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you retain the sins of any, they are 
retained.” 

72 Handwritten mark-up inserts (Yet). 


73 Handwritten mark-up suggests (ones). 


74 Handwritten mark-up inserts (longer). 


75 Handwritten mark-up inserts (them). 



11-80 


1084 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 46 L 5. 
The purpose of the first phase of today's practice 76 is to put 
you in the best 77 position to forgive yourself. 
After you have ap¬ 
plied the idea for today to all those who have come to mind, tell 
yourself: 

"God is the Love in which I forgive myself." W(82) 

Then devote the remainder of the practice period to offering 78 re¬ 
lated ideas such as: 

"God is the Love with which I love myself." 

"God is the Love in which I am blessed." 

W 46 L 6. 
The form of the applications may vary considerably, but 
the central idea should not be lost sight of. 
You might say, for ex¬ 
ample: 

"I cannot be guilty because I am a Son of God." 

"I have already been forgiven." 

"No fear is possible in a mind beloved of God." 

"There is no need to attack because love has forgiven me." 

The practice period should end, however, with a repetition of to¬ 
day's idea as originally stated. 


w 46 L 7. 
The shorter applications may consist either of a repetition 
of the idea in the original or in a related form 79 or in 80 more specific 
applications if 81 needed. 
They will be needed at any time during the 
day when you become aware of any kind of negative reaction to 
anyone, present or not. 
In this event, tell him silently: 

"God is the Love in which I forgive you." W(83) 


76 Handwritten mark-up inserts (periods). 


77 Handwritten mark-up replaces “the best” with “a better” and then crosses out “better.” 

78 Handwritten mark-up replaces “offering” with “adding”. 


79 Handwritten mark-up inserts (as you prefer). 


80 Handwritten mark-up inserts (Be sure, however, to make). 


81 Handwritten mark-up inserts (they are). 



1085 


11-81 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 47 "God is the Strength in which I trust." 

W 47 L 1. 
If you are trusting your own strength, you have every rea¬ 
son to be apprehensive, anxious, and fearful. 
What can you predict 
or control? What is there in you that can be counted on? What 
would give you the ability to be aware of all the facets of any prob¬ 
lem, and to resolve them in such a way that only good can come of 
it? What is there in you that gives you the recognition of the right 
solution, and the guarantee that it will be accomplished? 
w 47 L 2. 
Of yourself you can do none of these things. 
82 To believe 
that you can is to put your trust where trust is unwarranted, and to 
justify fear, anxiety, depression, anger, and sorrow. 
Who can put 
his faith in weakness and feel safe? Yet who can put his faith in 
strength and feel weak? 

w 47 L 3. 
God is your safety in every circumstance. 
His Voice speaks 
for Him in all situations and in every aspect of all situations, telling 
you exactly what to do to call upon His strength and His protection. 

There are no exceptions because God has no exceptions. 
And the 
Voice Which speaks for Him thinks as He does, 
w 47 L 4. 
Today we will try to reach past your own weakness to the 
Source of real strength. 
Four five-minute practice periods are nec¬ 
essary today, and longer and more frequent ones are urged. 
Close 
your eyes and begin as usual by repeating today's idea. 
Then spend 
a minute or two in searching for situations in your life which you 
have invested with fear, dismissing each one by telling yourself, 

"God is the Strength in which I trust." 
w 47 L 5. 
Now try to slip past all concerns related to your own sense 
of inadequacy. 
It is obvious that any situation which causes you 
concern is associated with feelings of inadequacy, since 83 otherwise 
you would believe that you could deal with the situation success- 


82 John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do noth- 
ing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like man¬ 
ner.” 

83 Handwritten mark-up suggests (for). 



11-82 


1086 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


fully. 
It is not by trusting yourself W(84) that you will gain confi¬ 
dence. 
But the strength of God in you is successful in all things, 
w 47 L 6. 
The recognition of your own frailty is a necessary step in 
the correction of your errors. 
But it is 84 hardly 85 a sufficient one in 
giving you the confidence which you need and to which you are en¬ 
titled. 
You must also gain an awareness that your confidence in 
your real strength is fully justified in every respect and in all cir¬ 
cumstances. 


W 47 L 7. 
In the latter phase of the practice period, try to reach down 
into your mind to a place of real safety. 
You will recognize that you 
have reached it if you feel a 86 deep peace, however briefly. 
Let go all 
the trivial things that churn and bubble on the surface of your mind, 
and reach down and below them to the Kingdom of Heaven. 
There 
is a place in you where there is perfect peace. 
There is a place in you 
where nothing is impossible. 
There is a place in you where the 
strength of God abides. 


w 47 L 8. 
Repeat the idea for today often. 
Use it as your answer to 
any disturbance. 
Remember that peace is your right because you 
are giving your trust to the strength of God. 
W(85f 


84 Handwritten mark-up suggests (could). 


85 Handwritten mark-up suggests (be). 


86 Handwritten mark-up suggests (sense of). 



1087 


11-83 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 48 "There is nothing to fear." 

w 48 L l. 
The idea for today simply states a fact. 
It is not a fact to 
those who believe in illusions, but illusions are not facts. 
In truth 
there is nothing to fear. 
It is very easy to recognize this. 
But it is 
very difficult to recognize 87 for those who want illusions to be true. 

W 48 L 2. 
Today's practice periods will be very short, very simple, 
and very frequent. 
Merely repeat the idea as often as possible. 
You 
can use it with your eyes open at any time and in any situation. 
It is 
strongly recommended, however, that you take a minute or so 
whenever possible to close your eyes and repeat the idea slowly to 
yourself several times. 
It is particularly important that you use the 
idea immediately, should anything disturb your peace of mind, 
w 48 L 3. 
The presence of fear is a sure sign that you are trusting in 
your own strength. 
The awareness that there is nothing to fear 
shows that somewhere in your mind, not necessarily in a place 
which you recognize as yet, you have remembered God and let His 
strength take the place of yours . 
88 The instant you are willing to do 
this there is indeed nothing to fear. 
W(86) 


87 Handwritten mark-up suggests (it). 


88 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your weakness) for “yours.” Notes has it as “yours.” 

2 Corinthians 12:9 And He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made perfect 
in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may 
rest upon me. 


Philippians 4:13 I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. 



11-84 


1088 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 49 "God's Voice speaks to me all through the day." 

w 49 L l. 
It is quite possible to listen to God's Voice all 89 day without 
interrupting your regular activities in any way. 
The part of your 
mind in which truth abides is in constant communication with God, 
whether you are aware of it or not. 
It is the other part of your mind 
that functions in the world and obeys the world's laws. 
It is this 
part which is constantly distracted, disorganized, and highly uncer¬ 
tain. 


w 49 L 2. 
The part that is listening to the Voice of God is calm, al¬ 
ways at rest and wholly certain. 
It is really the only part there is. 


The other part is a wild illusion, frantic and distraught, but without 
reality of any kind. 
Try today not to listen to it. 
Try to identify with 
the part of your mind where stillness and peace reign forever. 
Try 
to hear God's Voice call to you lovingly, reminding you that your 
Creator has not forgotten His Son. 


w 49 L 3. 
We will need at least four five-minute practice periods to¬ 
day, and more if possible. 
We will try actually to hear the 90 Voice 
reminding you of God 91 and of your Self. 
We will approach this 
happiest and holiest of thoughts with confidence, knowing that in 
doing so we are joining our will with the Will of God. 
He wants you 
to hear His Voice. 
He gave It to you to be heard. 


W 49 L 4. 
Listen in deep silence. 
Be very still and open your mind . 
92 
Go past all the raucous shrieks and sick imaginings that cover your 
real thoughts and obscure your eternal link with God. 
Sink deep 
into the peace that waits for you beyond the frantic, riotous 
thoughts and sounds and sights 93 of this insane world. 
You do not 
live there . 
94 We are trying to reach your real home. 
We are trying to 


m Handwritten mark-up suggests (through the). 


110 Handwritten mark-up suggests (God's). 


111 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Him). 


92 Psalm 46:10 Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth! 

93 Handwritten mark-up suggests (sights and sounds). 


94 Handwritten mark-up suggests (here) 


1089 


11-85 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


reach the place where you are truly welcome. 
We are trying to 
reach God. 
W(87) 

w 49 L 5. 
Do not forget to repeat today's idea very frequently. 
Do so 
with your eyes open when necessary, but closed when possible. 

And be sure that you 95 sit quietly and repeat the idea for today 
slowly 96 whenever you can, closing your eyes on the world, and re¬ 
alizing that you are inviting God's Voice to speak to you. 
W(88) 


93 Handwritten mark-up suggests (to) for “that you” 
96 Handwritten mark-up crosses out the word “slowly” 


11-86 


1090 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 50 "I am sustained by the Love of God." 

w 50 L l. 
Here is the answer to every problem that confronts 97 you 
today and tomorrow and throughout time. 
In this world, you be¬ 
lieve you are sustained by everything but God. 
Your faith is placed 
in the most trivial and insane symbols; pills, money, "protective" 
clothing, "influence," "prestige," being liked, knowing the "right" 
people, and an endless list of forms of nothingness which you en¬ 
dow with magical powers. 


w 50 L 2. 
All these things are your replacements for the Love of God. 

All these things are cherished to ensure a body identification. 
They 
are songs of praise to the ego. 
Do not put your faith in the worth¬ 
less. 
It will not sustain you. 


w 50 L 3. 
Only the Love of God will protect you in all circumstances. 

It will lift you out of every trial, and raise you high above all the 
perceived dangers of this world into a climate of perfect peace and 
safety. 
It will transport you into a state of mind which nothing can 
threaten, nothing can disturb, and 98 nothing can intrude upon the 
eternal calm of the Son of God. 


w 50 L 4. 
Put not your faith in illusions. 
They will fail you. 
Put all 
your faith in the Love of God within you, eternal, changeless and 
forever unfailing. 
This is the answer to whatever confronts you to¬ 
day. 
Through the Love of God in you, you can resolve all seeming 
difficulties without effort and in sure confidence. 
Tell yourself this 
often today. 
It is a declaration of release from the belief in idols. 
It 
is your acknowledgment of the truth about yourself. 


W 50 L 5. 
Twice today, morning and evening, let the idea for today 
sink deep into your consciousness. 
Repeat it, think about it, let re¬ 
lated thoughts come to help you recognize its truth, and allow peace 
to flow over you like a blanket of protection and surety. 
Let no idle 
and foolish thoughts enter to W(89) disturb the holy mind of the Son 


07 Handwritten mark-up suggests (will confront). 

1)8 Handwritten mark-up suggests (where). 



1091 


11-87 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


of God. 
Such is the Kingdom of Heaven." Such is the resting-place 
where your Father has placed you forever. 
W(90) 


99 Mathew 3:2 “saying, Repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.” 

Matthew 19:14 But Jesus said, “Let the little children come to Me, and do not forbid them; for of such 
is the kingdom of heaven.” 

This first Biblical quote is attributed to John the Baptist, but it is a teaching also attributed to Jesus. 
The 
phrase “Kingdom of Heaven” shows up 32 times in the Bible, all 32 in the Gospel according to Mat¬ 
thew. 
Elsewhere the same teaching uses the phrase “Kingdom of God” rather than “Kingdom of 
Heaven,” as in Mark 1:15. 
It shows up 20 times in the seven volumes of ACIM also. 
The basic formu¬ 
lation “repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand” has often been understood to mean, roughly, 
“confess your sins for the end of the world will occur soon.” Another way of understanding it, more 
plausible when we look at the Greek original in the Bible and examine it in light of ACIM is “change 
your mind; Heaven is as close to you as your hand.” 


11-88 


1092 


PROOF 




Volume II Workbook 


Review 1 (W 50 Rl) 

Introduction 

W 50 Rl 1. 
Beginning with today, we will have a series of review pe¬ 
riods. 
Each of them will cover five of the ideas already presented, 
starting with the first and ending with the fiftieth. 
There will be 100 a 
short comment 101 after each of the ideas, which you should consider 
in your review. 
In the practice period, the exercises should be done 
as follows: 

w 50 Rl 2. 
Begin, the day by reading the five ideas, with the com¬ 
ments included. 
Thereafter, it is not necessary to follow any particu¬ 
lar order in considering them, though each one should be practiced 
at least once. 
Devote two minutes or more to each practice period, 
thinking about the idea and the related comments . 
102 Do this as of¬ 
ten as possible during the day. 
If any one of the five ideas appeals 
to you more than the others, concentrate on that one. 
At the end of 
the day, however, be sure to review all of them once more. 


W 50 Rl 3. 
It is not necessary to cover the comments literally or thor¬ 
oughly in the practice periods. 
Try, rather, merely to emphasize the 
central point, and think about it as part of your review of the idea to 
which it relates. 
The review 103 exercises should be done with the 
eyes closed, and when you are alone in a quiet place, if possible. 


W 50 Rl 4. 
This is emphasized particularly for reviews at your stage 
of learning. 
It will be necessary, however, that you learn to require 
no special settings in which to apply what you have learned. 
You 
will need it most in situations which appear to be upsetting, rather 
than in those which already seem to be calm and quiet. 
The purpose 
of your learning is to enable you to bring the quiet with you, and to 


100 Handwritten mark-up suggests (a few). 


101 Urtext manuscript reads “comment” with the “s” handwritten in. 
Originally this might have been “a 
short comment” mistyped by leaving the word “a” out, or simply “short comments” or possibly even, 
as corrected by hand. 
The original reading in the Notes is “a short comment.” 

102 Handwritten mark-up suggests (after reading). 


103 Handwritten mark-up suggests (After you have read the idea and the related comments, the). 



1093 


11-89 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


heal distress and turmoil. 
This is not done by avoiding them and 
seeking a haven of isolation for yourself. 


W 50 R1 5. 
You will yet learn that peace is part of you, and requires 
only that you be there to embrace any situation in which you are. 

And finally you will learn that there is no limit to where you are, so 
that your peace is everywhere, as you are. 
W(9l) 
w 50 Rl 6. 
You will note that for review purposes 104 the ideas are not 
always given in quite their original form of statement . 
105 Use them 
as they are given here. 
It is not necessary to return to the original 
statements, nor to apply the ideas as was suggested then. 
We are 
now emphasizing the relationships among the first fifty of the ideas 
we have covered, and the cohesiveness of the thought system to 
which they are leading you. 
W(92) 


104 Handwritten mark-up suggests (some of). 


105 Handwritten mark-up suggests removing the words “of statement”. 



11-90 


1094 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 51 The review for today covers the following ideas: 


(1-5) 


W 51 L 1. 
1) “Nothing I see means anything.” 

The reason this is so is that I see nothing, and nothing has no mean¬ 
ing. 
It is necessary that I recognize this that I may learn to see. 


What I think I see now is taking the place of vision. 
I must let it go 
by realizing that it has no meaning, so that vision may take its place. 

W 51 L 2. 
2) “I have given what I see all the meaning it has for me.” 

I have judged everything I look upon. 
And it is this and only this 
that I see. 
This is not vision. 
It is merely an illusion of reality, be¬ 
cause my judgments have been made quite apart from reality. 
I am 
willing to recognize the lack of validity in my judgments because I 
want to see. 
My judgments have hurt me, and I do not want to see 
according to them. 


W 51 L 3. 
3) “I do not understand anything I see.” 

How could I understand what I see when I have judged it amiss? 
What I see is the projection of my own errors of thought. 
I do not 
understand what I see because it is not understandable. 
There is no 
sense in trying to understand it. 
But there is every reason to let it 
go, to make room for what can be seen and understood and loved. 
I 
can exchange what I see now for this merely by being willing to do 
so. 
Is not this a better choice than the one I made before? 

W 51 L 4. 
4) “These thoughts do not mean anything.” 

The thoughts of which I am aware do not mean anything because I 
am trying to think without God. 
What I call "my" thoughts are not 
my real thoughts. 
My real thoughts are the thoughts I think with 
God. 
I am not aware of them because I have made "my" thoughts 
to take their place. 
I am willing to recognize that "my" thoughts do 
not mean anything, and to let them go. 
I choose to have them re¬ 
placed by what they were intended to replace. 
"My" thoughts are 

meaningless, but all creation lies in the Thoughts I think with God. 

W(93) 

W 51 L 5. 
5) “I am never upset for the reason I think.” 


1095 


11-91 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


I am never upset for the reason I think because I am constantly try¬ 
ing to justify "my" thoughts. 
I am constantly trying to make them 
true. 
I make all things my "enemies," so that my anger is justified, 
and my attacks are warranted. 
I have not realized how much I have 
misused everything I see by assigning this role to it. 
I have done 
this to defend a thought system which has hurt me, and which I no 
longer want. 
I am willing to let it go. 
W(94) 


1096 

PROOF COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 52 Today's review covers these ideas: (6-10) 

W 52 L 1. 
6) “I am upset because I see what is not there.” 

Reality is never frightening. 
It is impossible that it could upset me. 

Reality brings only perfect peace. 
When I am upset, it is always be¬ 
cause I have replaced reality with illusions which I made up. 
The 
illusions are upsetting because I have given them reality, and thus 
regard reality as an illusion. 
Nothing in God's creation is affected in 
any way by this confusion of mine. 
I am always upset by nothing. 


W 52 L 2. 
7) “I see only the past.” 

As I look about, I condemn the world I look upon. 
I call this seeing. 


I hold the past against everyone and everything, making them my 
"enemies." When I have forgiven myself and remembered who I 
am, I will bless everyone and everything I see. 
There will be no 
past, and therefore no "enemies." And I will look with God 106 on all 
that I failed to see before. 


W 52 L 3. 
8) “My mind is preoccupied with past thoughts.” 

I see only my own thoughts, and my mind is preoccupied with the 
past. 
What, then, can I see as it is? Let me remember that I look on 
the past to prevent the present from dawning on my mind. 
Let me 
understand that I am trying to use time against God. 
Let me learn 
to give the past away, realizing that in so doing I am giving up noth¬ 
ing. 


W 52 L 4. 
9) “I see nothing as it is now.” 

If I see nothing as it is now, it can truly be said that I see nothing. 
I 
can see only what is now. 
The choice is not whether to see the past 
or the present: it is merely whether to see or not. 
What I have cho¬ 
sen to see has cost me vision. 
Now I would choose again, that I may 
see. 
W(95) 

W 52 L 5.10) “My thoughts do not mean anything.” 

I have no private thoughts. 
Yet it is only private thoughts of which I 
am aware. 
What can these thoughts mean? They do not exist, and 
so they mean nothing. 
Yet my mind is part of creation and part of 
its Creator. 
Would I not rather join the thinking of the universe than 

106 Handwritten mark-up suggests replacing “God” with (love). 



1097 


11-93 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


to obscure all that is really mine 107 with my pitiful and meaningless 
"private" thoughts? W(96) 


107 The Urtext manuscript has “mind” while the handwritten suggestion “mine” appears rather clearly 
to be a correction of a spelling error. 
We’ve thus incorporated this suggested change as a spelling cor¬ 
rection. 
The Notes also has “mine.” 


11-94 


1098 


PROOF 




Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 53 Today we will review the following: (11-15) 

W 53 L 1. 
11) “My meaningless thoughts are showing me a meaningless world.” 

Since the thoughts of which I am aware do not mean anything, the 
world which pictures them can have no meaning. 
What is produc¬ 
ing this world is insane, and so is what it produces. 
Reality is not 
insane, and I have real thoughts as well as insane ones. 
I can there¬ 
fore see a real world, if I look to my real thoughts as my guide for 
seeing. 


W 53 L 2. 
12) “I am upset because I see a meaningless world.” 

Insane thoughts are upsetting, and They produce a world in which 
there is no order anywhere. 
Only chaos rules a world which repre¬ 
sents chaotic thinking, and chaos has no laws. 
I cannot live in peace 
in such a world. 
I am grateful that this world is not real, and that I 
need not see it at all unless I choose to value it. 
And I do not choose 
to value what is totally insane and has no meaning. 


W 53 L 3. 
13) “A meaningless world engenders fear.” 

The totally insane engenders fear because it is completely unde¬ 
pendable, and offers no grounds for trust. 
Nothing in madness is 
dependable. 
It holds out no safety and no hope. 
But such a world is 
not real. 
I have given it the illusion of reality, and have suffered 
from my belief in it. 
Now I choose to withdraw this belief, and 
place my trust in reality. 
In choosing this, I will escape all the effects 
of the world of fear because I am acknowledging that it does not ex¬ 
ist. 
W(97) 

W 53 L 4. 
14) “God did not create a meaningless world.” 

How can a meaningless world exist if God did not create it? He is 
the Source of all meaning, and everything that is real is in His Mind. 

It is in my mind too, because He created it with me. 
Why should I 
continue to suffer from the effects of my own insane thoughts, when 
the perfection of creation is my home? Let me remember the power 
of my decision, and recognize where I really abide. 


W 53 L 5. 
15) “My thoughts are images which I have made.” 

Whatever I see reflects my thoughts. 
It is my thoughts which tell me 
where I am and what I am. 
The fact that I see a world in which 


1099 


11-95 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


there is suffering and loss and death shows me that I am seeing only 
the representation of my insane thoughts, and am not allowing my 
real thoughts to cast their beneficent light on what I see. 
Yet God's 
way is sure. 
The images I have made can not prevail against Him 
because it is not my will that they do so. 
My will is His, and I will 
place no other gods before Him. 
108 W(98) 


108 Exodus 20:3 You shall have no other gods before Me. 



11-96 


1100 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 54 These are the review ideas for today: (16-20) 

W 54 L 1. 
16) “I have no neutral thoughts.” 

Neutral thoughts are impossible because all thoughts have power. 

They will either make a false world or lead me to the real one. 
But 
thoughts cannot be without effects. 
As the world I see arises from 
my thinking errors, so will the real world rise before my eyes as I let 
my errors be corrected. 
My thoughts cannot be neither true nor 
false. 
They must be one or the other. 
What I see shows me which 
they are. 


W 54 L 2. 
17) “I see no neutral things.” 

What I see witnesses to what I think. 
If I did not think I would not 
exist, because life is thought. 
Let me look on the world 109 as the rep¬ 
resentation of my own state of mind. 
I know that my state of mind 
can change. 
And so I also know that the world I see can change as 
well. 


W 54 L 3. 
18) “I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my seeing.” 

If I have no private thoughts, I cannot see a private world. 
Even the 
mad idea of separation had to be shared before it could form the ba¬ 
sis of the world I see. 
Yet that sharing was a sharing of nothing. 
I 
can also call upon my real thoughts, which share everything with 
everybody. 
As my thoughts of separation call to the separation 
thoughts of others, so my real thoughts awaken 110 the real thoughts 
in them. 
And the world my real thoughts show me will dawn on 
their sight as well as mine. 


W 54 L 4. 
19) “I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my thoughts.” 

I am alone in nothing. 
Everything I think or say or do touches all 
the universe. 
A Son of God cannot think or speak or act in vain. 
He 
cannot be alone in anything. 
It is therefore in my power to change 
every mind along with mine, for mine is the power of God. 
W(99) 

W 54 L 5. 
20) “I am determined to see.” 

Recognizing the shared nature of my thoughts, I am determined to 
see. 
I would look upon the witnesses that show me the thinking of 


109 Handwritten mark-up suggests (I see). 


110 The Urtext manuscript clearly has “await” here but the Notes has “awaken” and so does FIP. 



1101 


11-97 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


the world has been changed. 
I would behold the proof that what 
has been done through me has enabled love to replace fear, laughter 
to replace weeping, and abundance to replace loss. 
I would look 
upon the real world, and let it teach me that my will and the Will of 
God are one. 
W(100) 


11-98 


PROOF " 02 COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 55 Today's review includes the following: (21-25) 

W 55 L 1. 
21) “I am determined to see things differently.” 

What I see now are but signs of disease, disaster and death. 
This 
cannot be what God created for His beloved Son. 
The very fact that 
I see such things is proof that I do not understand God. 
Therefore I 
also do not understand His Son. 
What I see tells me that I do not 
know who I am. 
I am determined to see the witnesses to the truth in 
me, rather than those which show me an illusion of myself. 


W 55 L 2. 
22) “What I see is a form of vengeance.” 

The world I see is hardly the representation of loving thoughts. 
It is 
a picture of attack on everything and by everything. 
It is anything 
but a reflection of the Love of God and the love of His Son. 
It is my 
own attack thoughts which give rise to this picture. 
My loving 
thoughts will save me from this perception of the world, and give 
me the peace God intended me to have. 


W 55 L 3. 
23) “I can escape from the world by giving up attack thoughts.” 

Herein lies my salvation, and nowhere else. 
Without attack 
thoughts I could not see a world of attack. 
As forgiveness allows 
love to return to my awareness I will see a world of peace and safety 
and Joy. 
And It is this that I choose to see, in place of what I look on 
now. 


W 55 L 4. 
24) “I do not perceive my own best interests.” 

How could I recognize my own best interests when I do not know 
who I am? What I think are my best interests would merely bind 
me closer to the world of illusions. 
I am willing to follow the Guide 
God has given me to find out what my own best interests are, rec¬ 
ognizing that I cannot perceive them by myself. 
W(101) 

W 55 L 5. 
25) “I do not know what anything is for.” 

To me, the purpose of everything is to prove that my illusions about 
myself are real. 
It is for that purpose that I attempt to use everyone 
and everything. 
It is this that I believe the world is for. 
Therefore I 
do not recognize its real purpose. 
The purpose I have given the 
world has le ul d to a frightening picture of it. 
Let me open my mind 

111 Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed “lead", illegible handwriting may be a correction 


1103 


11-99 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


to its 112 real purpose by withdrawing the one I have given it, and 
learning the truth about it. 
W(102) 


112 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the world's). 


11-100 1104 

PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 56 Our review for today covers the following: (26-30) 

W 56 L 1. 
26) “My attack thoughts are attacking my invulnerability.” 

How can I know who I am when I see myself as under constant at¬ 
tack? Pain, illness, loss, age and death seem to threaten me. 
All my 
hopes and wishes and plans appear to be at the mercy of a world I 
cannot control. 
Yet perfect security and complete fulfillment are my 
inheritance. 
I have tried to give my inheritance away in exchange 
for the world I see. 
But God has kept my inheritance safe for me. 


My own real thoughts will teach me what it is. 


W 56 L 2. 
27) “Above all else I want to see.” 

Recognizing that what I see reflects what I think I am, I realize that 
vision is my greatest need. 
The world I see attests to the fearful na¬ 
ture of the self-image I have made. 
If I would remember who I am, 
it is essential that I let this image of myself go. 
As it is replaced by 
truth, vision will surely be given me. 
And with this vision I will 
look upon the world and upon myself with charity and love. 


W 56 L 3. 
28) “Above all else I want to see differently.” 

The world I see holds my fearful self-image in place, and guarantees 
its continuance. 
While I see the world as I see it now, truth cannot 
enter my awareness. 
I would let the door behind this world be 
opened for me, that I may look past it to the world that 113 reflects the 
Love of God. 


W 56 L 4. 
29) “God is in everything I see.” 

Behind every image I have made, the truth remains unchanged. 
Be¬ 
hind every veil I have drawn across the face of love, its light remains 
undimmed. 
Beyond all my insane wishes is my will united with the 
Will of my Father. 
God is still everywhere and in everything for¬ 
ever. 
And we who are part of Him will yet look past all appear¬ 
ances, and recognize the truth beyond them all. 
W(l03) 

W 56 L 5. 
30) “God is in everything I see because God is in my mind.” 

In my own mind, behind all my insane thoughts of separation and 
attack, is the knowledge that all is one forever. 
I have not lost the 
knowledge of who I am because I have forgotten it. 
It has been kept 

113 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 



1105 


11-101 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


for me in the Mind of God, Who has not left His Thoughts. 
And I, 
who am among them, am one with them and 114 with Him. 
W(104) 


114 Handwritten mark-up suggests (One). 



11-102 


PROOF 


1106 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 57 Today let us review these ideas: (31-35) 

W 57 L 1. 
31) “I am not the victim of the world I see.” 

How can I be the victim of a world which can be completely undone 
if I so choose? My chains are loosened. 
I can drop them off merely 
by desiring to do so. 
The prison door is open. 
I can leave it 115 sim¬ 
ply by walking out. 
Nothing holds me in this world. 
Only my wish 
to stay keeps me a prisoner. 
I would give up 116 insane wishes, and 
walk into the sunlight at last. 


W 57 L 2. 
32) “I have invented the world I see.” 

I made up the prison in which I see myself. 
All I need do is recog¬ 
nize this, and I am free. 
I have deluded myself into believing it is 
possible to imprison the Son of God. 
I was bitterly mistaken in this 
belief, which I no longer want. 
The Son of God must be forever free. 

He is as God created him, and not what I would make of him. 
He is 
where God would have him be, and not where I thought to hold 
him prisoner. 


W 57 L 3. 
33) “There is another way of looking at the world.” 

Since the purpose of the world is not the one I ascribed to it, there 
must be another way of looking at it. 
I see everything upside-down, 
and my thoughts are the opposite of truth. 
I see the world as a 
prison for God's Son. 
It must be, then, that the world is really a 
place where he can be 117 set free. 
I would look upon the world as it 
is, and see it as a place where the Son of God finds his freedom. 


W 57 L 4. 
34) “I could see peace instead of this.” 

When I see the world as a place of freedom, I will realize that it re¬ 
flects the laws of God instead of the rules which I made up for it to 
obey. 
I will understand that peace, not war, abides in it. 
And I will 
perceive that peace also abides in the hearts of all who share this 
place with me. 
W(l05) 

W 57 L 5. 
35) “My mind is part of God's. 
I am very holy.” 


113 Handwritten mark-up suggests deleting “it.” 

116 Handwritten mark-up suggests (my). 


117 Handwritten mark-up suggests (is). 


PROOF " 07 COPY 


11-103 



Part 1 


As I share the peace of the world with my brothers, I begin to un¬ 
derstand that this peace comes from deep within myself. 
The world 
I look upon has taken on the light of my forgiveness, and shines for¬ 
giveness back at me. 
In this light, 118 1 begin to see what my illusions 
about myself had kept hidden. 
I begin to understand the holiness of 
all living things including myself, and their oneness with me. 
W(106) 


118 The Urtext manuscript has “life” crossed out by hand, with “light” written above it. 
This appears to 
be the correction of a typo, and is retained. 
The Notes has “light.” 


11-104 


1108 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 58 These ideas are for review today: (36-40) 

W 58 L 1. 
36) “My holiness envelops everything I see.” 

From my holiness does the perception of the real world come. 
Hav¬ 
ing forgiven, I no longer see myself as guilty. 
I can accept the inno¬ 
cence that is the truth about me. 
Seen through understanding eyes 
the holiness of the world is all I see, for I can picture only the 
thoughts I hold about myself. 


W 58 L 2. 
37) “My holiness blesses the world.” 

The perception of my holiness does not bless me alone. 
Everyone 
and everything I see in it's light shares in the joy it brings to me. 

There is nothing that is apart from this joy, because there is nothing 
that does not share my holiness. 
As I recognize my holiness, so does 
the holiness of the world shine forth for everyone to see. 


W 58 L 3. 
38) “There is nothing my holiness cannot do.” 

My holiness is unlimited in its power to heal, because it is unlimited 
in its power to save. 
What is there to be saved from except illu¬ 
sions? And what are all illusions except false ideas about myself? 
My holiness undoes them all by asserting the truth about me. 
In the 
presence of my holiness, which I share with God Himself, all idols 
vanish. 


W 58 L 4. 
39) “My holiness is my salvation.” 

Since my holiness saves me from all guilt, recognizing my holiness 
is recognizing my salvation. 
It is also recognizing the salvation of 
the world. 
Once I have accepted my holiness, nothing can make me 
afraid. 
And because I am unafraid, everyone must share in my un¬ 
derstanding, 119 which is the gift of God to me and to the world. 


W(107) 

W 58 L 5. 
40) “I am blessed as a Son of God.” 

Herein lies my claim to all good and only good. 
I am blessed as a 
Son of God. 
All good things are mine because God intended them 
for me. 
I cannot suffer any loss or deprivation or pain because of 
who I am. 
My Father supports me, protects me, and directs me in 


119 Handwritten mark-up suggests (salvation from fear) in place of “understanding.” The Notes has 
“share in my strength and understanding which are the gift of God to me ...” 


1109 


11-105 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


all things. 
His care for me is infinite, and is with me forever. 
I am 
eternally blessed as His Son. 
W(l08) 

Lesson 59 The following ideas are for review today: (41-45) 

W 59 L 1. 
41) “God goes with me wherever I go.” 

How can I be alone when God always goes with me? How can I be 
doubtful and unsure of myself when perfect certainty abides in 
Him? How can I be disturbed by anything when He rests in abso¬ 
lute 120 peace? How can I suffer when love and joy surround me 
through Him? Let me not cherish illusions about myself. 
I am per¬ 
fect because God goes with me wherever I go. 


W 59 L 2. 
42) “God is my strength. 
Vision is His gift.” 

Let me not look to my own eyes to see today. 
Let me be willing to 
exchange my pitiful illusion of seeing for the vision that is given by 
God. 
Christ's vision is His gift, and He has given it to me. 
Let me 
call upon this gift today, so that this day may help me to understand 
eternity. 


W 59 L 3. 
43) “God is my Source. 
I cannot see apart from Him.” 

I can see what God wants me to see. 
I cannot see anything else. 
Be¬ 
yond His Will lie only illusions. 
It is these I choose when I think I 
can see apart from Him. 
It is these I choose when I try to see 
through the body's eyes. 
Yet the vision of Christ has been given me 
to replace them. 
It is through this vision that I choose to see. 


W 59 L 4. 
44) “God is the Light in which I see.” 

I cannot see in darkness. 
God is the only Light. 
Therefore, if I am to 
see, it must be through Him. 
I have tried to define what seeing is, 
and I have been wrong. 
Now it is given me to understand that God 
is the Light in which I see. 
Let me welcome vision and the happy 
world it will show me. 
W(109) 

W 59 L 5. 
45) “God is the Mind with which I think.” 

I have no thoughts which I do not share with God. 
I have no 
thoughts apart from Him because I have no mind apart from His. 


As part of His Mind, my thoughts are His and His Thoughts are 
mine. 
W(llO) 


1 0 Handwritten mark-up suggests (eternal). 



11-106 


PROOF 


1110 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 60 These ideas are for today's review. 
(46-50) 

W 60 L 1. 
46) “God is the Love in which I forgive.” 

God does not forgive because He has never condemned. 
The blame¬ 
less cannot blame, and those who have accepted their innocence see 
nothing to forgive. 
Yet forgiveness is the means by which I will rec¬ 
ognize my innocence. 
It is the reflection of God's Love on earth. 
It 
will bring me near enough to Heaven that the Love of God can reach 
down to me and raise me to my home. 


W 60 L 2. 
47) “God is the Strength in which I trust.” 

It is not my own strength through which I forgive. 
It is through the 
strength of God in me, which I am remembering as I forgive. 
As I 
begin to see, I recognize His reflection on earth. 
I forgive all things 
because I feel the stirring of His strength in me. 
And I begin to re¬ 
member the Love I chose to forget, but Which has not forgotten me. 

W 60 L 3. 
48) “There is nothing to fear.” 

How safe the world will look to me when I can see it! It will not 
look anything like what I imagine I see now. 
Everyone and every¬ 
thing I see will lean toward me to bless me. 
I will recognize in eve¬ 
ryone my dearest Friend. 
What could there be to fear in a world 
which I have forgiven, and which has forgiven me? 

W 60 L 4. 
49) “God's Voice speaks to me all through the day.” 

There is not a moment in which God's Voice ceases to call on my 
forgiveness to save me. 
There is not a moment in which His Voice 
fails to direct my thoughts, guide my actions, and lead my feet. 
I am 
walking steadily on toward truth. 
There is nowhere else I can go, 
because God's Voice is the only voice and the only guide that has 
been given to His Son. 
W(lll) 

W 60 L 5. 
50) “I am sustained by the Love of God.” 

As I listen to God's Voice, I am sustained by 121 His Love. 
As I open 
my eyes. 
His Love lights up the world for me to see. 
As I forgive. 

His Love reminds me that His Son is sinless. 
And as I look upon the 


1 1 The Urtext manuscript is missing the word “by” which is handwritten in. 
This is an apparent correc- 
tion of a typing mistake. 
The word “by” does show up in the Notes. 



mi 


11-107 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


world with the vision He has given me, I remember that I am His 
Son. 
W(112) 

Lesson 61 "I am the light of the world." 

w 61L l. 
Who is the light of the world except God's Son? 122 This, 
then, is merely a statement of the truth about yourself. 
It is the op¬ 
posite of a statement of pride, of arrogance, or of self-deception. 
It 
does not describe the self-concept you have made. 
It does not refer 
to any of the characteristics with which you have endowed your 
idols. 
It refers to you as you were created by God. 
It simply states 
the truth. 


w 61L 2. 
To the ego, today's idea is the epitome of self-glorification. 

But the ego does not understand humility, mistaking it for self¬ 
debasement. 
Humility consists of accepting your role in salvation, 
and in taking no other. 
It is not humility to insist that you cannot be 
the light of the world, if that is the function God assigned to you. 
It 
is only arrogance that would assert this function cannot be for you, 
and arrogance is always of the ego. 


w 61 L 3. 
True humility requires that you accept today's idea because 
it is God's Voice which tells you it is true. 
This is a beginning step in 
accepting your real function on earth. 
It is a giant stride toward tak¬ 
ing your rightful place in salvation. 
It is a positive assertion of your 
right to be saved, and an acknowledgment of the power that is 
given you to save others. 


w 61 L 4. 
You will want to think about this idea as often as possible 
today. 
It is the perfect answer to all illusions, and therefore to all 
temptation. 
It brings all the images you have made about yourself 
to the truth, and helps you depart in peace, 123 unburdened and cer¬ 
tain of your purpose. 



122 Matthew 5:14 You are the light of the world. 
A city that is set on a hill cannot be hidden. 


John 8:12 Then Jesus spoke to them again, saying, “I am the light of the world. 
He who follows Me 
shall not walk in darkness, but have the light of life.” 

John 9:5 “When I am in the world, I am the light of the world.” 

The phrase “light of the world” shows up 42 times in ACIM, 9 in the Text volume, and 33 in the 
Workbook. 
We are only footnoting the reference this once in the Workbook. 


123 Luke 2:29 Lord, now You are letting Your servant depart in peace, According to Your word; 


11-108 


1112 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 61L 5. 
As many practice periods as possible should be undertaken 
today, although each one need not exceed a minute or two. 
They 
should begin with telling yourself: W(113) 

"I am the light of the world. 


That is my only function. 


That is why I am here." 

Then think about these statements for a short while, preferably with 
your eyes closed if the situation permits. 
Let a few related thoughts 
come to you, and repeat the idea to yourself if your mind wanders 
away from the central thought. 


W 61 L 6. 
Be sure both to begin and end the day 124 with a practice pe¬ 
riod. 
Thus you will awaken with an acknowledgment of the truth 
about yourself, reinforce it throughout the day, and turn to sleep as 
you re-affirm your function and your only purpose here. 
These two 
practice periods may be longer than the rest, 125 if you find them 
helpful and want to extend them. 


w 61L 7. 
Today's idea goes far beyond the ego's petty views of what 
you are and what your purpose is. 
As a bringer of salvation, this is 
obviously necessary. 
This is the first of a number of giant steps we 
will take in the next few weeks. 
Try today to begin to build a firm 
foundation for these advances. 
126 You are the light of the world. 


God has built His plan for the salvation of His Son on you. 
W(ll4) 


'" 4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (today). 


125 Handwritten mark-up suggests (others). 


126 Luke 6:48 “He is like a man building a house, who dug deep and laid the foundation on the rock. 

And when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently against that house, and could not shake it, for it 
was founded on the rock.” 


1113 


11-109 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 62 "Forgiveness is my function as the light of the 
world." 

w 62 L l. 
It is your forgiveness that will bring the world of darkness 
to the light. 
It is your forgiveness that lets you recognize the light in 
which you see. 
Forgiveness is the demonstration that you are the 
light of the world. 
Through your forgiveness does the truth about 
yourself return to your memory. 
Therefore in your forgiveness lies 
your salvation. 


W 62 L 2. 
Illusions about yourself and the world are one. 
That is why 
all forgiveness is a gift to yourself. 
Your goal is to find out who you 
are, having denied your identity by attacking creation and its Crea¬ 
tor. 
Now you are learning how to remember the truth. 
For this, at¬ 
tack must be replaced by forgiveness, so that thoughts of life may 
replace thoughts of death. 


W 62 L 3. 
Remember that in every attack you call upon your own 
weakness, while every 127 time you forgive you call upon the strength 
of Christ in you. 
Do you not then begin to understand what for¬ 
giveness will do for you? It will remove all sense of weakness, 
strain and fatigue from your mind. 
It will take away all fear and 
guilt and pain. 
It will restore the invulnerability and power God 
gave Flis Son to your awareness. 


W 62 L 4. 
Let us be glad to begin and end this day by practicing to¬ 
day's idea, and to use it as frequently as possible throughout the 
day. 
It will help to make the day as happy for you as God wants 
you to be. 
And it will help those around you, as well as those who 
seem to be far away in space and time, to share this happiness with 
you. 


w 62 L 5. 
As often as you can, closing your eyes if possible, say to 
yourself: 

"Forgiveness is my function as the light of the world. 


I would fulfill my function that I may be hap-py." 

'" 7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (each). 



11-110 


1114 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Then devote a minute or two to considering your function, and the 
happiness and release 128 it will bring you. 
W(115) 
w 62 L 6. 
Let related thoughts come freely, for your heart will recog¬ 
nize these words, and in your mind is the awareness that they are 
true. 
Should your attention wander, repeat the idea and add: 

"I would remember this because I want to be happy." W(ii6) 


1 s Handwritten mark-up suggests “release (that) it will bring you” 


1115 


11-111 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 63 "The light of the world brings peace to every mind 
through my forgiveness." 

w 63 L l. 
How holy are you who have the power to bring peace to 
every mind! How blessed are you who can learn to recognize the 
means for letting this be done through you! What purpose could 
you have that would bring you greater happiness? 

W 63 L 2. 
You are indeed the light of the world with such a function. 

The Son of God looks to you for his redemption. 
It is yours to give 
him, for it belongs to you. 
Accept no trivial purpose or meaningless 
desire in its place, or you will forget your function and leave the Son 
of God in hell. 
This is no idle request that is being asked of you. 


You are asked to accept salvation that it may be yours to give. 


W 63 L 3. 
Recognizing the importance of this function, we will be 
happy to remember it very often today. 
We will begin the day by 
acknowledging it, and close the day with the thought of it in our 
awareness. 
And throughout the day, we will repeat this as often as 
we can: 

“The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my 

forgiveness. 


I am the means God has appointed for the salvation of the world." 
w 63 L 4. 
129 You will probably find it easier to let the related thoughts 
come to you in the minute or two which you should devote to con¬ 
sidering this if you can close your eyes. 
Do not, however, wait for 
such an opportunity. 
No chance should be lost for reinforcing to¬ 
day's idea. 
Remember that God's Son looks to you for his salvation. 

And who but your Self must be His Son? W(ll7) 


1 q Handwritten mark-up suggests (If you close your eyes,) at the beginning of the sentence, and crosses 
out “if you can close your eyes.” at the end. 



11-112 


1116 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 64 "Let me not forget my function." 

w 64 L l. 
Today's idea is merely another way of saying, "Let me not 
wander into temptation." 130 The purpose of the world you see is to 
obscure your function of forgiveness, and provide you with a justifi¬ 
cation for forgetting it. 
It is the temptation to abandon God and His 
Son, taking on a physical appearance. 
It is this which the body's 
eyes look upon. 


w 64 L 2. 
Nothing the body's eyes seem to see can be anything but a 
form of temptation, since this was the purpose of the body itself. 


Yet we have learned that the Holy Spirit has another use for all the 
illusions you have made, and therefore He sees another purpose in 
them. 
To the Holy Spirit, the world is a place where you learn to 
forgive yourself what you think of as your sins. 
In this perception, 
the physical appearance of temptation becomes the spiritual recog¬ 
nition of salvation. 


w 64 L 3. 
To review our last few lessons, your function here is to be 
the light of the world, a function given you by God. 
It is only the 
arrogance of the ego which leads you to question this, and only the 
fear of the ego which induces you to regard yourself as unworthy of 
the task assigned to you by God Himself. 
The world's salvation 
awaits your forgiveness because through it does the Son of God es¬ 
cape from all illusions and thus from all temptation. 
The Son of God 


is you. 



W 64 L 4. 
Only by fulfilling the function given you by God will you 
be happy. 
That is because your function is to be happy by using the 
means by 131 which happiness becomes inevitable. 
There is no other 
way. 
Therefore every time you choose whether or not to fulfill your 
function, you are really choosing whether to be happy or not. 


W 64 L 5. 
Let us remember this today. 
Let us remind ourselves of it 
in the morning and again at night, and all through the day as well. 


130 Matthew 6:13 “And do not lead us into temptation, 

But deliver us from the evil one. 


For Yours is the kingdom and the power and the glory forever.” Amen. 


131 Handwritten mark-up replaces the word “by” with (through). 



1117 


11-113 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W(ll8) Prepare yourself in advance for all the decisions you will 
make today by remembering that they are all really very simple. 

Each one will lead to happiness or unhappiness. 
Can such a simple 
decision really be difficult to make? 

w 64 L 6. 
Let not the form of the decision deceive you. 
Complexity 
of form does not imply complexity of content. 
It is impossible that 
any decision on earth can have a content different from just this one 
simple choice. 
That is the only choice the Holy Spirit sees. 
There¬ 
fore it is the only choice there is. 

w 64 L 7. 
Today, then, let us practice these thoughts: 

"Let me not forget my function. 


Let me not try to substitute mine for God’s. 


Let me forgive and be happy." 

At least once devote ten or fifteen minutes to reflecting on this with 
closed eyes. 
Related thoughts will come to help you, if you re¬ 
member the crucial importance of your function to you and to the 
world. 


W 64 L 8. 
In the frequent applications of today's idea to be made 
throughout the day, devote several minutes to reviewing the 132 
thoughts, and then to thinking about them and about nothing else. 

This will be difficult at first particularly, since you are not proficient 
in the mind discipline which it requires. 
You may need to repeat 
"Let me not forget my function" quite often, to help you concen¬ 
trate. 


W 64 L 9. 
Two forms of the shorter practice periods are required. 
At 
times, do the exercises with your eyes closed, trying to concentrate 
on the thoughts you are applying. 
At other times keep your eyes 
open after reviewing the thoughts and look slowly and 
unselectively about you, telling yourself: 

"This is the world it is my function to save." W(ii9) 


112 Handwritten mark-up suggests replacing “the” with (these). 



11-114 


1118 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 65 "My only function is the one God gave me." 

W 65 L 1. 
The idea for today reaffirms your commitment to salvation. 

It also reminds you that you have no other function 133 than this. 


Both of these thoughts are obviously necessary for a total commit¬ 
ment. 
Salvation cannot be the only purpose you hold while you still 
cherish others. 
The full acceptance of salvation as your only func¬ 
tion necessarily entails two phases; the recognition of salvation as 
your function, and the relinquishment of all the other goals you 
have invented for yourself. 


W 65 L 2. 
This is the only way in which you can take your rightful 
place among the Saviors of the world. 
This is the only way in which 
you can say and mean, "My only function is the one God gave me." 
This is the only way in which you can find peace of mind. 


W 65 L 3. 
Today, and for a number of days to follow, set aside ten to 
fifteen minutes for a more sustained practice period in which you 
try to understand and accept what today's idea 134 really means. 
It 135 
offers you escape from all your perceived difficulties. 
It places the 
key to the door to peace, which you have closed upon yourself, in 
your own hands. 
It gives you the answer to all the searching you 
have done since time began. 


w 65 L 4. 
Try, if possible, to undertake the daily extended practice 
periods at approximately the same time each day. 
Try, also, to de¬ 
termine this time today in advance, and then adhere to it as closely 
as possible. 
The purpose of this is to arrange your day so that you 
have set apart the time for God, as well as for all the trivial purposes 
and goals you will pursue. 
This is part of the long range discipli¬ 
nary training which your mind needs so that the Holy Spirit can use 
it consistently for the purpose He shares with you. 
W(120) 

W 65 L 5. 
For this 136 practice period, begin by reviewing the idea for 
today. 
Then close your eyes, repeat the idea to yourself once again, 

133 Handwritten mark-up switches word order (function other). 


134 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the idea for today) in place of “today’s idea”. 


135 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Today's idea). 


136 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the longer) for “this”. 



1119 


11-115 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


and watch your mind carefully to catch whatever thoughts cross it. 

At first, make no attempt to concentrate only on thoughts related to 
the idea for today . 
137 Rather, try to uncover each one 138 that arises 
to 139 interfere with it. 
Note each one 140 as it 141 comes to you with as 
little involvement or concern as possible, dismissing them 142 by tell¬ 
ing yourself: 

"This thought reflects a goal which is preventing me from 
accepting my only function." 

W 65 L 6. 
After a while, interfering thoughts will become harder to 
find. 
Try, however, to continue a minute or so longer, attempting to 
catch a few of the idle thoughts which escaped your attention be¬ 
fore, but do not strain or make undue effort in doing this. 
Then tell 
yourself: 

"On this clean slate, let my true function be written for me." 

You need not use these exact words, but try to get a sense of being 
willing to have your illusions of purpose be replaced by truth. 


w 65 L 7. 
Finally, repeat the idea for today once more and devote the 
rest of the practice period to trying to focus on its importance to 
you; the relief its acceptance will bring you by resolving your con¬ 
flicts once and for all, and the extent to which you really want salva¬ 
tion in spite of your own foolish ideas to the contrary. 


W 65 L 8. 
In the shorter practice periods, which should be under¬ 
taken at least once an hour, use this form in applying today's idea: 

"My only function is the one God gave me. 


I want no other and I have no other." 

Sometimes close your eyes as you practice, and sometimes keep 
them open and look about you. 
It is what you see now that will be 
totally changed when you accept today's idea completely. 
W(l2l) 


137 

138 

139 

140 

141 

142 


Handwritten mark-up suggests (today's idea). 

Handwritten mark-up suggests (thought). 

Handwritten mark-up suggests (which would). 

Handwritten mark-up suggests (these). 

Handwritten mark-up suggests (they). 

Handwritten mark-up suggests (each one). 



11-116 


PROOF 


1120 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 66 "My happiness and my function are one." 

w 66 L l. 
You have surely noticed an emphasis throughout our re¬ 
cent lessons on the connection between fulfilling your function and 
achieving happiness. 
This is because you do not really see the con¬ 
nection. 
Yet there is more than just a connection between them; they 
are the same. 
Their forms are different, but their content is com¬ 
pletely one. 


w 66 L 2. 
The ego does constant battle with the Holy Spirit on the 
fundamental question of what your function is. 
So does it do con¬ 
stant battle with the Holy Spirit about what your happiness is. 
It is 
not a two-way battle. 
The ego attacks and the Holy Spirit does not 
respond. 
He knows what your function is. 
He knows that it is your 
happiness. 


W 66 L 3. 
Today we will try to go past this wholly meaningless battle, 
and arrive at the truth about your function. 
We will not engage in 
ceaseless arguments about what it is. 
We will not become hope¬ 
lessly involved in defining happiness and determining the means 
for achieving it. 
We will not indulge the ego by listening to its at¬ 
tacks on truth. 
We will merely be glad that we can find out what 
truth is. 


w 66 L 4. 
Our longer practice period today has as its purpose your 
acceptance of the fact that not only is there a very real connection 
between the function God gave you and your happiness, but that 
they are actually identical. 
God gives you only happiness. 
There¬ 
fore the function He gave you must be happiness, even if it appears 
to be different. 
Today's exercises are an attempt to go beyond these 
differences in appearance, and recognize a common content where it 
exists in truth. 


W 66 L 5. 
Begin the 10 to 15 minute practice period by reviewing 
these thoughts: 

"God gives me only happiness. 


He has given my function to me. 



1121 


11-117 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Therefore my function must be happiness." W(122) 

Try to see the logic in this sequence, even if you do not 143 accept the 
conclusion. 
It is only if the first two thoughts are wrong that the 
conclusion could be false. 
Let us, then, think about the premises for 
a while, as we are practicing. 


W 66 L 6. 
The first premise is that God gives you only happiness. 


This could be false, of course, but in order to be false it is necessary 
to define God as something He is not. 
Love cannot give evil, and 
what is not happiness is evil. 
God cannot give what He does not 
have, and He cannot have what He is not. 
Unless God gives you 
only happiness. 
He must be evil. 
And it is this definition of Him 
which you are believing if you do not accept the first premise. 


W 66 L 7. 
The second premise is that God has given you your func¬ 
tion. 
We have seen that there are only two parts of your mind. 
One 
is ruled by the ego, and is made up of illusions. 
The other is the 
home of the Holy Spirit, where truth abides. 
There are no other 
guides but these to choose between, and no other outcomes possible 
as a result of your choice but the fear which the ego always engen¬ 
ders and the love which the Holy Spirit always offers to replace it. 


w 66 L 8. 
Thus it must be that your function is established by God 
through His Voice or is made by the ego which you made to replace 
Him. 
Which is true? Unless God gave your function to you, it must 
be the gift of the ego. 
Does the ego really have gifts to give, being 
itself an illusion and offering only the illusion of gifts? 

W 66 L 9. 
Think about this during the longer practice period today. 

Think also about the many forms which the illusion of your function 
has taken in your mind, and the many ways in which you try 144 to 
find salvation under the ego's guidance. 
Did you find it? Were you 
happy? Did they bring you peace? W(l23) We need great honesty 
today. 
Remember the outcomes fairly, and consider also whether it 
was ever reasonable to expect happiness from anything the ego has 


143 Handwritten mark-up suggests (yet). 


144 Handwritten mark-up suggests (tried). 



11-118 


1122 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


ever proposed. 
Yet the ego is the only alternative to the Holy 
Spirit's Voice. 


W 66 L 10. 
You will listen to madness or hear the truth. 
Try to make 
this choice as you think about the premises on which our conclusion 
rests. 
We can share in this conclusion, but in no other. 
For God 
Himself shares it with us. 


W 66 L 11. 
Today's idea is another giant stride in the perception of the 
same as the same, and the different as different. 
On one side stand 
all illusions. 
All truth stands on the other. 
Let us try today to real¬ 
ize that only the truth is true. 


W 66 L 12. 
In the shorter practice periods, which would be most help¬ 
ful today if undertaken twice an hour, this form of the application is 
suggested: 

"My happiness and function are one, 
because God has given me both ." 

It will not take more than a minute, and probably less, to repeat 

these words slowly, and think about them a little 145 as you say them. 

W(124) 


143 Handwritten mark-up suggests (while). 



1123 


11-119 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 67 "Love created me like Itself." 

w 67 L l. 
Today's idea is a complete and accurate statement of what 
you are. 
This is why you are the light of the world. 
This is why 
God appointed you as the world's savior. 
This is why the Son of 
God looks to you for his salvation. 
He is saved by what you are. 


We will make every effort today to reach this truth about you, and 
to realize fully, if only for a moment, that it is the truth. 


W 67 L 2. 
In the longer practice period, we will think about your real¬ 
ity and its wholly unchanged and unchangeable nature. 
We will 
begin by repeating this truth about you, and then spend a few min¬ 
utes adding some relevant thoughts, such as: 

"Holiness created me holy 1 * 6 " 

"Kindness created me kind." 

"Helpfulness created me helpful." 

"Perfection created me perfect." 

Any attribute which is in accord with God as He defines Himself is 
appropriate for use. 
We are trying today to undo your definition of 
God and replace it with His Own. 
We are also trying to emphasize 
that you are part of His definition of Himself. 


w 67 L 3. 
After you have gone over several such related thoughts, try 
to let all thoughts drop away for a brief preparatory interval, and 
then try to reach past all your images and preconceptions about 
yourself to the truth in you. 
If Love created you like Itself this Self 
must be in you. 
And somewhere in your mind It is there for you to 


find. 



w 67 L 4. 
You may find it necessary to repeat the idea for today from 
time to time, to replace distracting thoughts. 
You may also find that 
this is not sufficient, and that you need to continue adding other 
thoughts related to the truth about yourself. 
Yet perhaps you will 
succeed in going past that, and through the interval of thoughtless- 


l4< ’ The Urtext manuscript has “whole” typed and crossed out with the word “holy” handwritten in. 
The 
Notes also has “holy” as does FIP. 



11-120 


1124 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


ness 147 to the awareness of a blazing W(125) light in which you recog¬ 
nize yourself as Love created you. 
Be confident that you will do 
much today to bring that awareness nearer, whether you feel you 
have succeeded or not. 


W 67 L 5. 
It will be particularly helpful today to practice the idea for 
today 148 as often as you can. 
You need to hear the truth about your¬ 
self as frequently as possible, because your mind is so preoccupied 
with false self-images. 
Four or five times an hour, and perhaps even 
more, it would be most beneficial to remind yourself that Love cre¬ 
ated you like Itself. 
Hear the truth about yourself in this. 


W 67 L 6. 
Try to realize in the shorter practice periods, that this is not 
your tiny solitary voice that tells you this. 
This is the Voice for God, 
reminding you of your Father and of your Self. 
This is the Voice of 
truth, replacing everything that the ego tells you about yourself with 
the simple truth about the Son of God. 
You were created by Love 
like Itself. 
W(l26) 


147 The original Urtext manuscript reads (thought-lessness). 

I4S Handwritten mark-up suggests (the day). 



1125 


11-121 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 68 "Love holds no grievances." 

w 68 L l. 
You who were created by Love like Itself can hold no griev¬ 
ances and know your Self. 
To hold a grievance is to forget who you 
are. 
To hold a grievance is to see yourself as a body. 
It is the deci¬ 
sion 149 to let the ego rule your mind, and to condemn the body to 
death. 
Perhaps you do not yet fully realize just what holding griev¬ 
ances does to your awareness. 
150 It seems to split you off from your 
Source, and make you unlike Him. 
It makes you believe that He is 
like what you think you have become, for no-one can conceive of his 
Creator as unlike himself. 


W 68 L 2. 
Shut off from your Self, Who 151 remains aware of His 152 
likeness to His 153 Creator, your Self seems to sleep, while the part of 
your mind that weaves illusions in its sleep appears to be awake. 

Can all this arise from holding grievances? Oh yes! For he who 
holds grievances denies he was created by Love, and his Creator has 
become fearful to him in his dreams 154 of hate. 
Who can dream of 
hatred and not fear God? 

w 68 L 3. 
It is as sure that those who hold grievances will redefine 
God in their own image as it is certain that God created them like 
Himself and defined them as part of Him. 
155 It is as sure that those 
who hold grievances will suffer guilt as it is certain that those who 
forgive will find peace. 
It is as sure that those who hold grievances 
will forget who they are as it is certain that those who forgive will 
remember. 


W 68 L 4. 
Would you not be willing to relinquish your grievances if 
you believed all this were so? Perhaps you do not think that you 


49 Handwritten mark-up suggests (To hold a grievance is). 


150 Handwritten mark-up suggests (mind). 


151 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Which). 


152 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Its). 


153 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Its). 


154 Handwritten mark-up suggests (dream). 


1,5 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



11-122 


1126 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


can let all your grievances go. 
That, however, is simply a question 
of motivation. 
Today we will try to find out how you would feel 
without them. 
If you succeed even by ever so little, there will never 
be a problem in motivation ever again. 
W(l27) 

W 68 L 5. 
Begin today's extended practice period by searching your 
mind for those against whom you hold what you regard as major 
grievances. 
Some of these will be quite easy to find. 
Then think of 
the seemingly minor grievances you hold against those you like, 
and even think you love. 
It will quickly become apparent that there 
is no-one against whom you do not cherish grievances of some sort. 

This has left you alone in all the universe in your perception of 
yourself. 


w 68 L 6. 
Determine now to see all these people as friends. 
Say to 
them all, collectively, thinking of each one in turn as you do so: 

“I would see you as my friend, 

that I may remember you are part of me, 

and come to know myself. 
’’ 

Spend the remainder of the practice period trying to think of your¬ 
self as completely at peace with everyone and everything, safe in a 
world which protects you and loves you, and which you love in re¬ 
turn. 


w 68 L 7. 
Try to feel safety surrounding you, hovering over you, and 
holding you up. 
Try to believe, however briefly, that nothing can 
harm you in any way. 
At the end of the practice period tell yourself: 

“Love holds no grievances, 
when I let all my grievances go, 

I will know I am perfectly safe. 
” 

W 68 L 8. 
The short practice periods should include a quick applica¬ 
tion of today's ideas in this form, whenever any thought of griev¬ 
ance arises against anyone, physically present or not: 

“Love holds no grievances. 


Let me not betray my Self. 
” 

In addition, repeat the idea several times an hour in this form: 

“Love holds no grievances. 



1127 


11-123 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


I would wake to my Self 
by laying all my grievances aside 
and wakening in Him." W(128) 


11-124 


PROOF 


1128 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 69 "My grievances hide the light of the world in me." 

w 69 L l. 
No-one can look upon what your grievances conceal. 
Be¬ 
cause your grievances are hiding the light of the world in you, eve¬ 
ryone stands in darkness, and you beside him. 
But as the veil of 
your grievances is lifted, you are released with him. 
Share your sal¬ 
vation now with him who stood beside you when you were in hell. 

He is your brother in the light of the world which saves you both. 


W 69 L 2. 
Today let us make another real attempt to reach the light in 
you. 
Before we undertake this in our more extended practice pe¬ 
riod, let us devote several minutes in thinking about what we are 156 
trying to do. 
We are literally attempting to get in touch with the 
salvation of the world. 
We are trying to see past the veil of darkness 
that keeps it concealed. 
We are trying to let the veil be lifted, and 157 
see the tears of God's Son disappear in the sunlight, 
w 69 L 3. 
Let us begin our longer practice period today with the full 
realization of all this, 158 and 159 real determination to reach what is 
dearer to us than all else. 
Salvation is our only need. 
There is no 
other purpose here, and no other function to fulfill. 
Learning salva¬ 
tion is our only goal. 
Let us end the ancient search today, by finding 
the light in us and holding it up for everyone who searches with us 
to look upon and rejoice. 


w 69 L 4. 
Very quietly now, with your eyes closed, try to let 160 all the 
content which generally occupies your consciousness go. 
Think of 
your mind as a vast round area, 161 surrounded by a layer of heavy 
dark clouds. 
You can see only the clouds because you seem to be 
standing outside the whole area, 162 and quite apart from it. 
From 
where you stand, you can see no reason to believe there is a brilliant 
light hidden by the clouds. 
The clouds seem to be the only reality. 



156 Overstrike typing suggests (will be). 


157 Handwritten mark-up suggests (to). 


158 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that this is so). 

L " 5 Handwritten mark-up suggests (with). 


160 Handwritten mark-up suggests (go of). 


11,1 Handwritten mark-up suggests (circle). 


11,7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (circle). 



1129 


11-125 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


They seem to be all there is to see. 
Therefore you do not attempt to 
go through them and past them, which is the only way in which you 
would be really convinced W(l29) of their lack of substance. 
We will 
make this attempt today. 


W 69 L 5. 
After you have thought about the importance of what you 
are trying to do for yourself and the world, try to settle 163 in perfect 
stillness, remembering only how much you want to reach the light 
in you today, - now. 
Determine to go past the clouds. 
Reach out 
and touch them in your mind. 
Brush them aside with your hand; 
feel them resting on your cheeks and forehead and eyelids as you go 
through them. 
Go on; clouds cannot stop you. 


W 69 L 6. 
If you are doing the exercises properly, you will begin to 
feel a sense of being lifted up and carried ahead. 
Your little effort 
and small determination call on the power of the universe to help 
you, and God Himself will raise you from darkness into light. 
You 
are in accord with His Will. 
You cannot fail because your will is 


His. 



W 69 L 7. 
Have confidence in your Father today, and 164 be certain that 
He has heard you and has answered you. 
You may not recognize 
His answer yet, but you can indeed be sure that it is given you, and 
you will yet receive it. 
Try, as you attempt to go through the clouds 
to the light, to hold this confidence in your mind. 
Try to remember 
that you are at last joining your will to God's. 
Try to keep the 
thought clearly in mind that what you undertake with God must 
succeed. 
Then let the power of God work in you and through you, 
that His Will and yours may be done. 
165 

W 69 L 8. 
In the shorter practice periods, which you will want to do 
as often as possible in view of the importance of today's idea to you 
and your happiness, remind yourself that your grievances are hid¬ 
ing the light of the world from your awareness. 
Remind yourself 


163 Handwritten mark-up suggests (down). 


164 Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests a comma instead, 
which we feel is preferable. 


165 Matthew 6:10 “Your kingdom come. 
Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.” 


11-126 


1130 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


also that you are not searching for it alone, and that you do know 
where to look for it. 
Say, then: 

“My grievances hide the light of the world in me. 


I cannot see what I have hidden. 


Yet I want to let it be revealed to me 

for my salvation and the salvation of the world." W(130) 

Also, be sure to tell yourself: 

“If I hold this grievance, the light of the world will be hidden from me, ” 

if you are tempted to hold anything against anyone today. 
W(131) 


1131 


11-127 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 70 "My salvation comes from me." 

W 70 L 1. 
All temptation is nothing more than some form of the basic 
temptation not to believe the idea for today. 
Salvation seems to 
come from anywhere except from you. 
So, too, does the source of 
guilt. 
You see neither guilt nor salvation as in your own mind, and 
nowhere else. 
When you realize that all guilt is solely an invention 
of your mind, you must also realize that guilt and salvation must be 
in the same place. 
'“Understanding this you are saved, 
w 70 L 2. 
The seeming "cost" of accepting today's idea is this: It 
means that nothing outside yourself can save you; nothing outside 
yourself can give you peace. 
But it also means that nothing outside 
yourself can hurt you, or disturb your peace, or upset you in any 
way. 
Today's idea places you in charge of the universe, where you 
belong because of who you are. 


w 70 L 3. 
This is not a role which can be partially accepted, and 167 
you must surely begin to see that accepting it is salvation. 
It may 
not, however, be clear to you why the recognition that guilt is in 
your own mind entails the realization that salvation is there as well. 

God would not have put the remedy for sickness where it cannot 
help. 
That is the way your mind has worked, but hardly His. 
He 
wants you to be healed, and so He has kept the Source of healing 
where the need for healing lies. 


w 70 L 4. 
You have tried to do just the opposite, making every at¬ 
tempt, however distorted and fantastic it might be, to separate heal¬ 
ing from the sickness for which it was intended, and thus keep the 
sickness. 
Your purpose was to ensure that healing did not occur; 
God's purpose was to ensure that it did. 
Today we will practice re¬ 
alizing that God's Will and ours are really the same in this. 
W(l32) 
God wants us to be healed, and we do not really want to be sick be¬ 
cause it makes us unhappy. 
Therefore, in accepting the idea for to- 


166 Handwritten mark-up suggests (In). 


167 Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests a comma instead, 
which we feel is preferable 


11-128 


1132 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


day, we are in agreement with God. 
He does not want us to be sick. 

Neither do we. 
He wants us to be healed. 
So do we. 


W 70 L 5. 
We are ready for two longer practice periods today, each of 
which should last some ten to fifteen minutes. 
We will, however, 
still let you decide when to undertake them. 
We will follow this 
practice for a number of lessons, and it would again be well to de¬ 
cide in advance when would be a good time to lay aside for each of 
them, and adhere to your own decision 168 as closely as possible, 
w 70 L 6. 
Begin these practice periods by repeating the idea for to¬ 
day, adding a statement signifying your recognition that salvation 
comes from nothing outside of you. 
You might put it this way: 

“My salvation comes from me. 


It cannot come from anywhere else. 
” 

Then devote a few minutes with your eyes closed, to reviewing 
some of the external places where you have looked for salvation in 
the past, - in other people, in possessions, in various situations and 
events, and in self-concepts which you sought to make real. 
Recog¬ 
nize that it was 169 not there. 
170 Tell yourself: 

“My salvation cannot come from any of these things. 


My salvation comes from me, and only from me. 
” 

W 70 L 7. 
Now we will try again to reach the light in you, which is 
where your salvation is. 
You cannot find it in the clouds that sur¬ 
round the light, and it is in them you have been looking for it. 
It is 
not there. 
It is past the clouds, and in the light beyond. 
Remember 
that you will have to go through the clouds before you can reach the 
light. 
But remember also that you have never found anything in the 

cloud patterns you imagined that endured, or that you wanted. 

W(133) 

w 70 L 8. 
Since all illusions of salvation have failed you, surely you 
do not want to remain in the clouds looking vainly for idols there, 
when you could so easily walk on into the light of real salvation. 


Try to pass the clouds by whatever means appeals to you. 
If it helps 

168 Handwritten mark-up suggests (s). 


169 Handwritten mark-up suggests (is). 


170 Handwritten mark-up removes period and inserts (and). 



1133 


11-129 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


you, think of me holding your hand and leading you. 
And I assure 
you that this will be no idle fantasy. 


W 70 L 9. 
For the short and frequent practice periods today, remind 
yourself that your salvation comes from you, and nothing but your 
own thoughts can hamper your progress. 
You are free from all ex¬ 
ternal interference. 
You are in charge of your salvation. 
You are in 
charge of the salvation of the world. 
Say, then: 

“My salvation comes from me. 


Nothing outside of me can hold me back. 


Within me is the world’s salvation and my own. 
” W(134) 


11-130 


1134 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 71 "Only God's plan for salvation will work." 

W 71 L 1 . 
You may not realize that the ego has set up a plan for salva¬ 
tion in opposition to God's. 
It is this plan in which you believe. 


Since it is the opposite of God's, you also believe that to accept God's 
plan in place of the ego's is to be damned. 
This sounds preposter¬ 
ous, of course. 
Yet after we have considered just what the ego's plan 
is, perhaps you will realize that, however preposterous it may be, 
you do believe in 171 it. 


w 71L 2. 
The ego's plan for salvation centers around holding griev¬ 
ances. 
It maintains that if someone else spoke or acted differently, 
if some external circumstance or event were changed, you would be 
saved. 
Thus the source of salvation is constantly perceived as out¬ 
side yourself. 
Each grievance you hold is a declaration, and an as¬ 
sertion in which you believe, that 172 says, "If this were different, I 
would be saved." The change of mind that is necessary for salvation 
is thus demanded of everyone and everything except yourself. 


W 71 L 3. 
The role assigned to your own mind in this plan, then, is 
simply to determine what other than itself must change if you are to 
be saved. 
According to this insane plan, any perceived source of 
salvation is acceptable, provided that it will not work. 
This ensures 
that the fruitless search will continue, for the illusion that, 173 al¬ 
though this hope has 174 failed, there is still grounds for hope in other 
places and in other things, persists. 
Another person will yet serve 
better; another situation will yet offer success, 
w 71L 4. 
Such is the ego's plan for your salvation. 
Surely you can 
see how it is in strict accord with the ego's basic doctrine, "Seek but 
do not find?" 175 For what could more surely guarantee that you will 


171 The word “in” is not present in the Urtext manuscript, but is handwritten in. 
It appears to be a cor- 
rection of a typing error. 


172 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 


173 Handwritten mark-up moves (persists) from end of sentence to this location. 


174 Handwritten mark-up suggests (always). 


I7? Matthew 7:7 Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you. 



1135 


11-131 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


not find salvation than to channelize all your efforts in searching for 
it where it is not? W(135) 

w 71L 5. 
God's plan for salvation works simply because, by follow¬ 
ing His direction, you seek for salvation where it is. 
But if you are to 
succeed, as God promises you will, you must be willing to seek 
there only. 
Otherwise your purpose is divided, and you will at¬ 
tempt to follow two plans for salvation which are diametrically op¬ 
posed in all ways. 
The result can only bring confusion, misery, and 
a deep sense of failure and despair. 


w 71 L 6. 
How can you escape all this? Very simply. 
The idea for 
today is the answer. 
Only God's plan for salvation will work. 
There 
can be no real conflict about this, because there is no possible alter¬ 
native to God's plan 176 that will save you. 
His is the only plan that is 
certain in its outcome. 
His is the only plan that must succeed. 
Let 
us practice recognizing this certainty today. 
And let us rejoice that 
there is an answer to what seems to be a conflict with no resolution 
possible. 
All things are possible to God. 
177 Salvation must be yours 
because of His plan, which cannot fail. 


W 71 L 7. 
Begin the two longer practice periods for today by thinking 
about today's idea, and realizing that it contains two parts, each 
making equal contribution to the whole. 
God's plan for your salva¬ 
tion will work, and other plans will not. 
Do not allow yourself to 
become depressed or angry at the second part; it is inherent in the 
first. 
And in the first is your full release from all your own insane 
attempts and mad proposals to free yourself. 
They have led to de¬ 
pression and anger, but 178 God's plan will succeed. 
It will lead to 
release and joy. 


w 71 L 8. 
Remembering this, let us devote the remainder of the ex¬ 
tended practice period to asking God to reveal His plan to us. 
Ask 
Him very specifically: 


176 Handwritten mark-up suggests (for salvation). 


177 Matthew 19:26 But Jesus looked at them and said to them, “With men this is impossible, but with 
God all things are possible.” 

178 Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests a comma instead, 
which we feel is preferable 


PROOF ” 36 COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


"What would you have me do? ” 

Where would You have me go? 

What would You have me say, and to whom?” 

Give Him full charge of the rest of the practice period, and let Him 
tell you what needs to be done by you in His plan for your salva¬ 
tion. 
He will answer you in proportion to your willingness to hear 
His Voice. 
Refuse not to hear. 
The very W(l36) fact that you are do¬ 
ing the exercises proves that you have some willingness to listen. 

This is enough to establish your claim to God's answer, 
w 71L 9. 
In the shorter practice periods tell yourself often that God's 
plan for salvation, and only His, will work. 
Be alert to all tempta¬ 
tion to hold grievances today, and respond to them with this form of 
today's idea: 

"Holding grievances is the opposite of God’s plan for salvation. 


And only His plan will work. 
” 

Try to remember the 179 idea for today some six or seven times an 
hour. 
There could be no better way to spend a half minute or less 
than to remember the Source of your salvation, and to see It where It 
is. 
W(137) 


179 Handwritten mark-up suggests (today's) instead of “the”. 



1137 


11-133 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 72 "Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for 
salvation." 

w 72 L l. 
While we have recognized that the ego's plan for salvation 
is the opposite of God's, we have not yet emphasized that it is an 
active attack on His plan, and a deliberate attempt to destroy it. 
In 
the attack, God is assigned the attributes which are actually associ¬ 
ated with the ego, while the ego appears to take on the attributes of 
God. 


w 72 L 2. 
The ego's fundamental wish is to replace God. 
In fact, the 
ego is the physical embodiment of this 180 wish. 
For it is this 181 wish 
which seems to surround the mind with a body, keeping it separate 
and alone, and unable to reach other minds except through the body 
which was made to imprison it. 
The limit on communication cannot 
be the best means to expand communication. 
Yet the ego would 
have you believe that it is. 


W 72 L 3. 
Although the attempt to keep the limitations which a body 
would impose is obvious here, it is perhaps not so apparent why 
holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation. 
But let 
us consider the kinds of things which you are apt to hold grievances 
for. 
Are they not always associated with something a body does? A 
person says something we 182 do not like; he does something that 
displeases us 183 ; he "betrays" his hostile thoughts in his behavior. 


W 72 L 4. 
We 184 are not dealing here with what the person is. 
On the 
contrary, we 185 are exclusively concerned with what he does in a 
body. 
We 186 are doing more than failing to help in freeing him from 
its 187 limitations. 
We 188 are actively trying to hold him to it by con¬ 
fusing it with him, and judging them as one. 
Herein is God at- 


180 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


181 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


182 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


183 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


184 Handwritten mark-up suggests (You). 


185 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


186 Handwritten mark-up suggests (You). 


187 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the body's). 


188 Handwritten mark-up suggests (You). 



11-134 


PROOF 


1138 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


tacked, for if His Son is only a body, so must He be as well. 
A crea¬ 
tor wholly unlike his creation is inconceivable. 


w 72 L 5. 
If God is a body, what must His plan for salvation be? 

What could it be but death? In trying to present Himself as the Au¬ 
thor of life and not of death. 
He is a liar and a deceiver, full of false 
promises, and offering illusions in place of truth. 
W(138) The body's 
apparent reality makes this view of God quite convincing. 
In fact, if 
the body were real, it would be difficult indeed to escape this con¬ 
clusion. 
And every grievance that you hold insists that the body is 
real. 
It overlooks entirely what your brother is. 
It reinforces your 
belief that he is a body, and condemns him for it. 
And it asserts that 
his salvation must be death, projecting this attack onto God, and 
holding Him responsible for it. 


w 72 L 6. 
To this carefully prepared arena, where angry animals seek 
for prey and mercy cannot enter, the ego comes to save you. 
God 
made you a body. 
Very well. 
Let us accept this and be glad. 
As a 
body, do not let yourself be deprived of what the body offers. 
Take 
the little you can get. 
God gave you nothing. 
The body is your only 
savior. 
It is the death of God and your salvation. 
This is the univer¬ 
sal belief of the world you see. 


W 72 L 7. 
Some hate the body, and try to hurt and humiliate it. 
Oth¬ 
ers love the body, and try to glorify and exalt it. 
But while it stands 
at the center of your concept of yourself, you are attacking God's 
plan for salvation, and holding your grievances against Him and 
His creations, that you may not hear the Voice of truth and welcome 
it as Friend. 
Your chosen Savior takes His place instead. 
It is your 
friend; He is your enemy. 
We will try today to stop these senseless 
attacks on salvation. 
We will try to welcome it instead. 


W 72 L 8. 
Our 189 upside-down perception has been ruinous to our 190 
peace of mind. 
We 191 have seen ourselves 192 in a body and the truth 


18,5 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Your). 


1,0 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


151 Handwritten mark-up suggests (You). 


192 Handwritten mark-up suggests (yourself). 



1139 


11-135 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


outside us, 193 locked away from our 194 awareness by the body's limi¬ 
tations. 
Now we are going to try to see this differently. 
The light of 
truth is in us, where it was placed by God. 
It is the body that is out¬ 
side us, and is not our concern. 
To be without a body is to be in our 
natural state. 
To recognize the light of truth in us is to recognize 
ourselves as we are. 
To see our Self as separate from the body is to 
end the attack on God's plan for salvation, and to accept it instead. 

And W(l39) wherever it 195 is accepted it is accomplished already, 
w 72 L 9. 
Our goal in the longer practice periods today is to become 
aware that God's plan for salvation has already been accomplished 
in us. 
To achieve this goal, we must replace attack with acceptance. 

As long as we attack it, we cannot understand what God's plan for 
us is. 
We are therefore attacking what we do not recognize. 
Now 
we are going to try to lay judgment aside, and ask what God's plan 
for us is: 

"What is salvation, Father? 

I do not know. 


Tell me, that I may understand. 
” 

Then we will wait in quiet for His answer. 


w 72 L to. 
We have attacked God's plan for salvation, without wait¬ 
ing to hear what it is. 
We have shouted our grievances so loudly 
that we have not listened to His Voice. 
We have used our griev¬ 
ances to close our eyes and stop our ears. 
Now we would see and 
hear and learn. 
"What is salvation. 
Father?" Ask and you will be 
answered. 
Seek and you will find. 


w 72 L ll. 
We are no longer asking the ego what salvation is and 
where to find it. 
We are asking it of truth. 
Be certain, then, that the 
answer will be true because of Whom you ask. 
Whenever you feel 
your confidence wane and your hope of success flicker and go out, 
repeat your question and your request, remembering that you are 


193 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


194 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


I9: ' Handwritten mark-up suggests (His plan). 



11-136 


1140 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


asking them of the infinite Creator of infinity. 
Who created you like 
Himself: 

“What is salvation, Father? 

I do not know. 


Tell me, that I may understand. 
’’ 

Fie will answer. 
Be determined to hear. 


W 72 L 12. 
One or perhaps two shorter practice periods an hour will 
be enough for today, since they will be somewhat longer than usual. 

The exercises are as follows 196 : 

“Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation. 


Let me accept it instead. 


What is salvation. 
Father? ” 

Then wait a minute or so in silence, preferably with your eyes 
closed, and listen for His answer. 
W(140) 197 W(141) 


196 Handwritten mark-up suggests(These exercises should begin with this). 


197 It would appear that there never was a page 140 in the Workbook manuscript. 
No page 140 
is present in any copy consulted. 
Between the end of Lesson 72 on page 139 of this manuscript 
and the begimring of Lesson 73 on page 141 of this manuscript there is no additional material 
in any known version of ACIM. 
It is likely therefore that the Scribes simply missed a page 
number rather than inadvertently omitting any material 


1141 


11-137 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 73 "I will there be light." 198 

W 73 L 1 . 
Today we are considering the will that you share with God. 

This is not the same as the ego's idle wishes, out of which darkness 
and nothingness arise. 
The will you share with God has all the 
power of creation in it. 
The ego's idle wishes are unshared, and 
therefore have no power at all. 
Its wishes are not idle in the sense 
that they can make a world of illusions in which your belief can be 
very strong. 
But they are idle indeed in terms of creation. 
They 
make nothing that is real. 


W 73 L 2. 
Idle wishes and grievances are partners or co-makers in 
picturing the world you see. 
The wishes of the ego gave rise to it, 
and the ego's need for grievances, which are necessary to maintain 
it, peoples it with figures which seem to attack you and call for 
"righteous" judgment. 
They 199 become the "middlemen" the ego 
employs to traffic in grievances, and 200 stand between your aware¬ 
ness and your brother's 201 reality. 
Beholding them, you do not know 
your brothers nor 202 your Self. 


W 73 L 3. 
Your will is lost to you in this strange bartering, in which 
guilt is traded back and forth, and grievances increase with each ex¬ 
change. 
Can such a world have been created by the will the Son of 
God shares with his Father? Did God create disaster for His Son? 
Creation is the will 203 of both 204 together. 
Would God create a world 
that kills Himself? 

W 73 L 4. 
Today we will try once more to reach the world that is in 
accordance with your will. 
The light is in it because it does not op¬ 
pose the Will of God. 
It is not Heaven, but the light of Heaven 
shines on it. 
Darkness has vanished; the ego's idle wishes have been 


1.8 Genesis 1:3 Then God said, “Let there be light”; and there was light. 


1.9 Handwritten mark-up suggests (These figures). 


200 Handwritten mark-up suggests (They) and the removal of “and” and the start of a new sentence. 


201 Handwritten mark-up suggests (brothers'). 


202 Handwritten mark-up suggests (or). 


201 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Will). 


204 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Both). 



11-138 


1142 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


withdrawn. 
Yet the light that 205 shines upon this world reflects your 
will, and so it must be in you that we will look for it. 


W 73 L 5. 
Your picture of the world can only mirror what is within. 

The source of neither light nor darkness can be found without. 

Grievances darken your mind, and you look out on a darkened 
world. 
Forgiveness lifts the darkness, reasserts your will, and lets 
you look upon W(l42) a world of light. 


W 73 L 6. 
We have repeatedly emphasized that the barrier of griev¬ 
ances is easily past, and cannot stand between you and your salva¬ 
tion. 
The reason is very simple. 
Do you really want to be in hell? 

Do you really want to weep and suffer and die? Forget the ego's 
arguments which seek to prove all this is really Heaven. 
You know 
it is not so. 
You can 206 not want this for yourself. 
There is a point 
beyond which illusions cannot go. 
Suffering is not happiness, and it 
is happiness you really want. 
Such is your will in truth. 
And so 
salvation is your will as well. 
You want to succeed in what we are 
trying to do today. 
We undertake it with your blessing and your 
glad accord. 


W 73 L 7. 
We will succeed today if you remember that you will salva¬ 
tion for yourself. 
You will to accept God's plan because you share in 
it. 
You have no will that can really oppose it, and you do not want 
to do so. 
Salvation is for you. 
Above all else you want the freedom 
to remember who you really are. 
Today it is the ego which stands 
powerless before your will. 
Your will is free, and nothing can pre¬ 
vail against it. 


w 73 L 8. 
Therefore we undertake the exercises for today in happy 
confidence, certain that we will find what it is your will to find, and 
remember what it is your will to remember. 
No idle wishes can de¬ 
tain us, nor deceive us with an illusion of strength. 
Today let your 
will be done. 
And end forever the insane belief that it is hell in place 
of Heaven that you choose. 



203 Strikeout and re-typing suggests (which). 


206 Urtext manuscript has “do” overstruck and “can” replacing it. 



1143 


11-139 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 73 L 9. 
We will begin our longer practice periods with the recogni¬ 
tion that God's plan for salvation, and only His, is wholly in accord 
with your will. 
It is not the purpose of an alien power, thrust upon 
you unwillingly. 
It is the one purpose here on which you and your 
Father are in perfect accord. 
W(l43) You will succeed today, the time 
appointed for the release of the Son of God from hell and from all 
idle wishes. 
His will is now restored to his awareness. 
He is willing 
this very day to look upon the light in him and be saved. 


W 73 L 10. 
After reminding yourself of this and determining to keep 
your will clearly in mind, tell yourself with gentle firmness and 
quiet certainty: 

“I will there be light. 


Let me behold the light 

that reflects God’s Will and mine. 
" 

Then let your will assert itself, joined with the power of God and 
united with your Self. 
Put the rest of the practice period under 
Their guidance. 
Join with Them as They lead the way. 


w 73 L ll. 
In the shorter practice periods, again make a declaration of 
what you really want. 
Say: 

“I will there be light. 


Darkless is not my will. 
” 

This should be repeated several times an hour. 
It is most important, 
however, to apply today's idea in this form immediately you are 
tempted to hold a grievance of any kind. 
This will help you let your 
grievances go, instead of cherishing them and hiding them in the 
darkness. 
W(144) 


11-140 


1144 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 74 "There is no will but God's." 

w 74 L l. 
The idea for today can be regarded as the central thought 
toward which all our exercises are directed. 
God's is the only will. 

When you have recognized this, you have recognized that your will 
is His. 
The belief that conflict is possible has gone. 
Peace has re¬ 
placed the strange idea that you are torn by conflicting goals. 
As an 
expression of the Will of God, you have no goal but His. 

w 74 L 2. 
There is great peace in today's idea. 
And the exercises for 
today are directed toward finding it. 
The idea itself is wholly true. 

Therefore it cannot give rise to illusions. 
Without illusions conflict 
is impossible. 
Let us try to recognize this today, and experience the 
peace this recognition brings. 


w 74 L 3. 
Begin the longer practice periods by repeating these 
thoughts several times, slowly and with firm determination to un¬ 
derstand what they mean and to hold them in mind: 

“There is no will but God’s. 


I cannot be in conflict. 
” 

Then spend several minutes in adding some related thoughts, such 
as: 

“I am at peace. 
” 

“Nothing can disturb me. 
My will is God’s. 
’’ 

“My will and God's are one. 
” 

“God wills peace for His Son. 
” 

During this introductory phase, be sure to deal quickly with any 
conflict thoughts that may cross your mind. 
Tell yourself immedi¬ 
ately: 

“There is no will but God's 

These conflict thoughts are meaningless. 
” 

w 74 L 4. 
If there is one conflict area which seems particularly diffi¬ 
cult to resolve, single it out for special consideration. 
Think about it 
briefly but very specifically, identify the particular person or per¬ 
sons and the situation or situations involved, and tell yourself: 

“There is no will but God’s. 


I share it with Him. 



1145 


11-141 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


My conflicts about _ cannot be real." W(145) 


W 74 L 5. 
After you have cleared your mind in this way, close your 
eyes and try to experience the peace to which your reality entitles 
you. 
Sink into it, and feel it closing around you. 
There may be some 
temptation to mistake these attempts for withdrawal, but the differ¬ 
ence is easily detected. 
If you are succeeding, you will feel a deep 
sense of joy and an increased alertness, rather than a feeling of 
drowsiness and enervation. 
Joy characterizes peace. 
By this experi¬ 
ence will you recognize that you have reached it. 


W 74 L 6. 
If you feel yourself slipping off into withdrawal, quickly 
repeat the idea for today and try again. 
Do this as often as neces¬ 
sary. 
There is definite gain in refusing to allow retreat into with¬ 
drawal, even if you do not experience the peace you seek, 
w 74 L 7. 
In the shorter periods, which should be undertaken at regu¬ 
lar and predetermined intervals today, say to yourself: 

"There is no will but God’s. 


I seek His peace today." 

Then try to find what you are seeking. 
A minute or two every half 
hour, with eyes closed if possible, would be well spent on this to¬ 
day. 
W(146) 


11-142 


1146 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 75 "The light has come." 

W75L1. 
The light has come. 
You are healed and you can heal. 
The 
light has come. 
You are saved and you can save. 
You are at peace 
and you bring peace with you wherever you go. 
Darkness and tur¬ 
moil and death have disappeared. 
The light has come. 
Today we 
celebrate the happy ending to your long dream of disaster. 
There 
are no dark dreams now. 
The light has come. 


W 75 L 2. 
Today the time of light begins for you and everyone. 
It is a 
new era, in which a new world is born. 
The old one has left no trace 
upon it in its passing. 
Today we see a different world because the 
light has come. 
Our exercises for today will be happy ones, in 
which we offer thanks for the passing of the old and the beginning 
of the new. 
No shadows from the past remain to darken our sight 
and hide the world forgiveness offers us. 


W 75 L 3. 
Today we will accept the new world as what we want to 
see. 
We will be given what we desire. 
We will to see the light; the 
light has come. 


W 75 L 4. 
Our longer practice periods will be devoted to looking at 
the world which our forgiveness shows us. 
This is what we want to 
see, and only this. 
Our single purpose makes our goal inevitable. 

Today the real world rises before us in gladness, to be seen at last. 

Sight is given us, now that the light has come. 
We do not see the 
ego's shadow on the world today. 
We see the light, and in it we see 
Heaven's reflection lie across the world. 


w 75 L 5. 
Begin the 207 practice period by telling yourself the glad tid¬ 
ings of your release: 208 
"The light has come. 


I have forgiven the world." W(l47) 

Dwell not upon the past today. 
Keep a completely open mind, 
washed of all past ideas and clean of every concept you have made. 



207 Handwritten mark-up suggests (longer). 


208 Luke 1:19 And the angel answered and said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of 
God, and was sent to speak to you and bring you these glad tidings.” 


1147 


11-143 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


You have forgiven the world today. 
You can look upon it now as if 
you never saw it before. 
You do not know yet what it looks like. 

You merely wait to have it shown to you. 
20 'While you wait, repeat 
several times slowly and in complete patience; 

"The light has come. 


I have forgiven the world." 

w 75 L 6. 
Realize that your forgiveness entitles you to vision. 
Under¬ 
stand that the Holy Spirit never fails to give the gift of sight to the 
forgiving. 
Believe He will not fail you now. 
You have forgiven the 
world. 
He will be with you as you watch and wait. 
He will show 210 
what true vision sees. 
It is His Will, and you have joined with Him. 

w 75 L 7. 
Wait patiently for Him. 
He will be there. 
The light has 
come. 
You have forgiven the world. 
Tell Him you know you can¬ 
not fail because you trust in Him . 
211 Tell yourself you wait in cer¬ 
tainty to look upon the world He promised you. 
From this time 
forth you will see differently. 
Today the light has come. 
And you 
will see the world that has been promised you since time began, and 
in which is the end of time ensured. 


w 75 L 8. 
The shorter practice periods, too, will be joyful reminders 
of your release. 
Remind yourself every quarter of an hour or so that 
today is a time for special celebration. 
Give thanks for mercy and 
the Love of God. 
Rejoice in the power of forgiveness to heal your 
sight completely. 
Be confident that on this day there is a new be¬ 
ginning. 
Without the darkness of the past upon your eyes, you can¬ 
not fail to see today. 
And what you see will be so welcome that you 
will gladly extend today forever. 
Say, then: 

"The light has come. 


I have forgiven the world." W(148) 

Should you be tempted, say to anyone who seems to pull you back 
to darkness: 


209 Handwritten mark-up suggests(And). 


210 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


211 Handwritten mark-up suggests (And). 



11-144 


1148 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


"The light has come. 


I have forgiven you." 

W 75 L 9. 
We dedicate this day to the serenity in which God would 
have you be. 
Keep it in your awareness of yourself and see it eve¬ 
rywhere today, as we celebrate the beginning of your vision, and the 
sight of the real world which has come to replace the unforgiven 
world you thought was real. 
W(149) 


1149 


11-145 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 76 "I am under no laws but God's" 

w 76 L l. 
We have observed before how many senseless things have 
seemed to you to be salvation. 
Each has imprisoned you with laws 
as senseless as itself. 
You are not bound by them. 
Yet to under¬ 
stand that this is so, you must first realize salvation lies not there. 

While you would seek for it in things that have no meaning, you 
bind yourself to laws that make no sense. 


w 76 L 2. 
Thus do you seek to prove salvation is where it is not. 
To¬ 
day we will be glad you cannot prove it. 
For if you could, you 
would forever seek 212 where it is not and never find it. 
The idea for 
today tells you once again how simple is salvation. 
Look for it 
where it waits for you, and there it will be found. 
Look nowhere 
else, for it is nowhere else. 


W 76 L 3. 
Think of the freedom in the recognition that you are not 
bound by all the strange and twisted laws which you have set up to 
save you. 
You really think that you would starve unless you have 
stacks of green paper strips and piles of metal discs. 
You really 
think a small round pellet or some fluid pushed into your veins 
through a sharpened needle will ward off death. 
You really think 
you are alone unless another body is with you. 

w 76 L 4. 
It is insanity that thinks these things. 
You call them laws, 
and put them under different names in a long catalogue of rituals 
that have no use and serve no purpose. 
You think you must obey 
the "laws" of medicine, of economics, and of health. 
Protect the 
body and you will be saved. 
These are not laws, but madness. 


W 76 L 5. 
The body is endangered by the mind that hurts itself. 
The 
body suffers 213 that the mind will fail to see it is the victim of itself. 

The body's suffering is a mask the mind holds up to hide what 
really suffers. 
It would not understand it is its own enemy; that it 
attacks itself and wants to die. 
It is from this your W(l50) "laws" 
would save the body. 
It is for this you think you are a body. 



212 Handwritten mark-up suggests (salvation). 


213 Handwritten mark-up suggests (just in order). 



11-146 


1150 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 76 L 6. 
There are no laws except the laws of God. 
This needs re¬ 
peating, - over and over until you realize that it applies to every¬ 
thing that you have made in opposition to His Will. 
Your magic has 
no meaning. 
What it is meant to save does not exist. 
Only what it is 
meant to hide will save you. 


w 76 L 7. 
The laws of God can never be replaced. 
We will devote 
today to rejoicing that this is so. 
It is no longer a truth which we 
would hide. 
We realize instead it is a truth which keeps us free for¬ 
ever . 
214 Magic imprisons, but the laws of God set free. 
The light has 
come because there are no laws but His. 


W 76 L 8. 
We will begin the longer practice periods today with a 
short review of the different kinds of "laws" we have believed we 
must obey. 
These would include, for example, the laws of nutrition, 
of immunization, of medication, and of the body's protection in in¬ 
numerable ways. 
Think further; you believe in laws of friendship, 
of "good" relationships and reciprocity. 


W 76 L 9. 
Perhaps you even think that there are laws which set forth 
what is God's and what is yours. 
Many "religions" have been based 
on this. 
They would not save, but damn in Heaven's name. 
Yet 
they are no more strange than other "laws" you hold must be 
obeyed to make you safe. 


w 76 L 10 . 
There are no laws but God's. 
Dismiss all foolish magical 
beliefs today, and hold your mind in silent readiness to hear the 
Voice that speaks the truth to you. 
You will be listening to One 
Who says there is no loss under the laws of God. 
Payment is neither 
given nor received. 
Exchange cannot be made, there are no substi¬ 
tutes, and nothing is replaced by something else. 
God's laws forever 
give and never take. 
W(l5l) 

w 76 L ll. 
Hear Him Who tells you this, and realize how foolish are 
the laws you thought upheld the world you thought you saw. 
Then 
listen further. 
He will tell you more. 
About the love your Father 
has for you. 
About the endless joy He offers you. 
About His yearn- 


14 John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 


1151 


11-147 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


ing for His only Son, created as His channel for creation; denied to 
Him by his belief in hell. 


W 76 L 12. 
Let us today open God's channels to Him, and let His Will 
extend through us to Him. 
Thus is creation endlessly increased. 


His Voice will speak of this to us, as well as of the joys of Heaven 
which His laws keep limitless forever. 
We will now 215 repeat today's 
idea until we have listened and understood there are no laws but 
God's. 
Then we will tell ourselves, as a dedication with which the 
practice period concludes: 

"I am under no laws but God’s." 

w 76 L 13. 
We will repeat this dedication as often as possible today; 
at least four or five times an hour, as well as in response to any 
temptation to experience ourselves as subject to other laws through¬ 
out the day. 
It is our statement of freedom from all danger and all 
tyranny. 
It is our acknowledgment that God is our Father, and that 
His Son is saved. 
W(l52) 


215 Urtext manuscript has “not” which is clearly inappropriate. 
Handwritten mark-up strikes the word, 
as does FIP, but we think it was probably supposed to be “now” instead of “not” as this is one of the 
most common “typos” in English. 
The Notes has the glyph for “now.” 


11-148 


1152 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 77 "I am entitled to miracles." 

w 77 L l. 
You are entitled to miracles because of what you are. 
You 
will receive miracles because of what God is. 
And you will offer 
miracles because you are one with God. 
Again, how simple is salva¬ 
tion! It is merely a statement of your true identity. 
It is this that we 
will celebrate today. 


w 77 L 2. 
Your claim to miracles does not lie in your illusions about 
yourself. 
It does not depend on any magical powers you have as¬ 
cribed to yourself, nor on any of the rituals you have devised. 
It is 
inherent in the truth of what you are. 
It is implicit in what God your 
Father is. 
It was ensured in your creation, and guaranteed by the 
laws of God. 


W 77 L 3. 
Today we will claim the miracles which are your right, 
since they belong to you. 
You have been promised full release from 
the world you made. 
You have been assured that the Kingdom of 
God is within you, and can never be lost 216 We ask no more than 
what belongs to us in truth. 
Today, however, we will also make 
sure that we will not content ourselves with less. 


W 77 L 4. 
Begin the longer practice periods 217 by telling yourself quite 
confidently that you are entitled to miracles. 
Closing your eyes, re¬ 
mind yourself that you are asking only for what is rightfully yours. 

Remind yourself also that miracles are never taken from one and 
given to another, and that in asking for your rights you are uphold¬ 
ing the rights of everyone. 
Miracles do not obey the laws of this 
world. 
They merely follow from the laws of God. 


W 77 L 5. 
After this brief introductory phase, wait quietly for the as¬ 
surance that your request is granted. 
You have asked for the salva¬ 
tion of the world and for your own. 
You have requested that you be 
given the means by which this is accomplished. 
You cannot fail to 
be assured in this. 
You are but asking that the Will of God be done. 



216 Luke 17:21 “Nor will they say, ‘See here!’ or ‘See there!’ For indeed, the kingdom of God is within 
you.” 

217 The Urtext manuscript has the singular “period”, with the “s” handwritten in. 



1153 


11-149 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 77 L 6. 
In doing this, you do not really ask for anything. 
You state 
a fact that cannot be denied. 
W(l53) The Holy Spirit cannot but as¬ 
sure you that your request is granted. 
The fact that you accepted 
must be so. 
There is no room for doubt and uncertainty today. 
We 
are asking a real question at last. 
The answer is a simple statement 
of a simple fact. 
You will receive the assurance that you seek. 


W 77 L 7. 
Our shorter practice periods will be frequent, and will also 
be devoted to a reminder of a simple fact. 
Tell yourself often today: 

"I am entitled to miracles." 

Ask for them whenever a situation arises in which they are called 
for. 
You will recognize these situations, 218 you are not relying on 
yourself to find them, 219 and you are therefore fully entitled to re¬ 
ceive them 220 whenever you ask. 
Remember, too, not to be satisfied 
with less than the perfect answer. 
Be quick to tell yourself, should 
you be tempted: 

"I will not trade miracles for grievances. 


I want only what belongs to me. 


God has established miracles as my right." W(154) 


218 Handwritten mark-up suggests (And since), beginning a new sentence here. 


219 Handwritten mark-up suggests(the miracles). 


220 Handwritten mark-up suggests (it). 



11-150 


1154 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 78 "Let miracles replace all grievances." 

W 78 L 1 . 
Perhaps it is not yet quite clear to you that each decision 
that you make is one between a grievance and a miracle. 
Each 
grievance stands like a dark shield of hate before the miracle it 
would conceal. 
And as you raise it up before your eyes, you will 
not see the miracle beyond. 
Yet all the while it waits for you in 
light, but you behold your grievances instead, 
w 78 L 2. 
Today we go beyond the grievances, to look upon the 
miracle instead. 
We will reverse the way you see by not allowing 
sight to stop before it sees. 
We will not wait before the shield of 
hate, but lay it down and gently lift our eyes in silence, to behold the 
Son of God. 


W 78 L 3. 
He waits for you behind your grievances, and as you lay 
them down he will appear in shining light where each one stood 
before. 
For every grievance is a block to sight, and as it lifts, you see 
the Son of God where he has always been. 
He stands in light, but 
you were in the dark. 
Each grievance made the darkness deeper, 
and you could not see. 
Today we will attempt to see God's Son. 
We 
will not let ourselves be blind to him; we will not look upon our 
grievances. 
So is the seeing of the world reversed, as we look out 
toward truth, away from fear. 


w 78 L 4. 
We will select one person you have used as target for your 
grievances, and lay the grievances aside, and look at him. 
Someone, 
perhaps, you fear and even hate; someone you think you love who 
angers you; someone you call a friend, but whom you see as difficult 
at times, or hard to please; demanding, irritating, or untrue to the 
ideal he should accept as his according to the role you set for him. 


w 78 L 5. 
You know the one to choose; his name has crossed your 
mind already. 
He will be the one of whom we ask God's Son be 
shown to us. 
221 Through seeing him behind the grievances that we 222 
have held against him, you will learn W(155) that what lay hidden 


1 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


2 " 1 2 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 



1155 


11-151 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


while you saw him not is there in everyone, and can be seen. 
He 
who was enemy is more than friend when be is freed to take the 
holy role the Holy Spirit has assigned to him. 
Let him be Savior 
unto you today. 
Such is his role in God your Father's plan. 


w 78 L 6. 
Our longer practice periods today will see him in this role. 

We 223 will attempt to hold him in our 224 mind, first as you now con¬ 
sider him. 
We 225 will review his faults, the difficulties you have had 
with him, the pain be caused you, his neglect, and all the little and 
the larger hurts he gave. 
We 226 will regard his body with its flaws 
and better points as well, as 227 we 228 will think of his mistakes and 
even of his "sins." 

w 78 L 7. 
Then let us ask of Him who knows this Son of God in his 
reality and truth, that we may look on him a different way, and see 
our Savior shining in the light of true forgiveness, given unto us. 


We ask Him in the Holy Name of God and of His Son, as holy as 
Himself: 

"Let me behold my Savior in this one 
You have appointed as the One for me 
To ask to lead me to the holy light 
In which he stands, that I may join with him." 

The body's eyes are closed, and as you think of him who grieved 
you, let your mind be shown the light in him beyond your griev¬ 
ances. 


w 78 L 8. 
What you have asked for cannot be denied. 
Your Savior 
has been waiting long for this. 
He would be free, and make his 
freedom yours. 
The Holy Spirit leans from him to you, seeing no 
separation in God's Son. 
And what you see through Him will free 
you both. 
Be very quiet now, and look upon your shining Savior. 



223 Handwritten mark-up suggests (You). 


224 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


225 Handwritten mark-up suggests (You). 


226 Handwritten mark-up suggests (You). 

2-7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (and). 

2 " 8 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 



11-152 


1156 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


No dark grievances obscure the sight of him. 
You have allowed the 
Holy Spirit to express through him the role God gave Him, that you 
might be saved. 


W 78 L 9. 
God thanks you for these quiet times today, in which you 
laid your images aside, W(l56) and looked upon the miracle of love 
the Holy Spirit showed you in their place. 
The world and Heaven 
join in thanking you, for not one Thought of God but must rejoice as 
you are saved, and all the world with you. 


W 78 L 10. 
We will remember this throughout the day, and take the 
role assigned to us as part of God's salvation plan, and not our own. 

Temptation falls away when we allow each one we meet to save us, 
and refuse to hide his light behind our grievances. 
To everyone you 
meet, and to the ones you think of, or remember from the past, al¬ 
low the role of Savior to be given, that you may share it with 
them. 
229 For you both, and all the sightless ones as well, we pray: 
“Let miracles replace all grievances. 
” W(157) 


2 2 Handwritten mark-up suggests (him). 



1157 


11-153 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 79 "Let me recognize the problem so it can be 
solved." 

W 79 L 1. 
A problem cannot be solved if you do not know what it is. 

Even if it is really solved already, you will still have the problem 
because you cannot 230 recognize that it has been solved. 
This is the 
situation of the world. 
The problem of separation, which is really 
the only problem, has already been solved. 
But 231 the solution is not 
recognized because the problem is not recognized. 


W 79 L 2. 
Everyone in this world seems to have his own special prob¬ 
lems. 
Yet they are all the same, and must be recognized as one if the 
one solution which solves them all is to be accepted. 
Who can see 
that a problem has been solved if he thinks the problem is some¬ 
thing else? Even if he is given the answer, he cannot see its rele¬ 
vance. 


W 79 L 3. 
That is the position in which you find yourselves now. 
You 
have the answer, but you are still uncertain about what the problem 
is. 
A long series of different problems seem to confront you, and as 
one is settled the next one and the next arise. 
There seems to be no 
end to them. 
There is no time in which you feel completely free of 
problems, and at peace. 


W 79 L 4. 
The temptation to regard problems as many is the tempta¬ 
tion to keep the problem of separation unsolved. 
The world seems 
to present you with a vast number of problems, each requiring a dif¬ 
ferent answer. 
This perception places you in a position in which 
your problem solving must be inadequate, and failure must be ^in¬ 
evitable. 


w 79 L 5. 
No-one could solve all the problems the world appears to 
hold. 
They seem to be on so many levels, in such varying forms and 
with such varied content, that they confront you with an impossible 
situation. 
Dismay and depression are inevitable as you regard 


210 Handwritten mark-up suggests (will not). 


231 Handwritten mark-up suggests(Yet). 


232 Handwritten mark-up suggests(is). 



11-154 


1158 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


them. 
Some spring up unexpectedly, just as you think you have re¬ 
solved the previous ones. 
Others remain unsolved under a cloud of 
denial, and rise to haunt you from time to time, only to be hidden 
again but still unsolved. 
W(l58) 

w 79 L 6. 
All this complexity is but a desperate attempt not to recog¬ 
nize the problem, and therefore not to let it be resolved. 
If you 
could recognize that your only problem is separation, no matter 
what form it takes, you could accept the answer because you would 
see its relevance. 
Perceiving the underlying constancy in all the 
problems which confront you, you would understand that you have 
the means to solve them all. 
And you would use the means because 
you recognize the problem. 


w 79 L 7. 
In our longer practice periods, 233 we will ask what the prob¬ 
lem is, and what is the answer to it. 
We will not assume that we al¬ 
ready know. 
We will try to free our minds of all the many different 
kinds of problems that we think we have. 
We will try to realize that 
we have only one problem, which we have failed to recognize. 
We 
will ask what it is, and wait for the answer. 
We will be told. 
Then 
we will ask for the solution to it. 
And we will be told. 


w 79 L 8. 
Our 234 exercises for today will be successful to the extent to 
which we 235 do not insist on defining the problem. 
Perhaps we 236 
will not succeed in letting all our 237 preconceived notions go, but 
that is not necessary. 
All that is necessary is to entertain some doubt 
about the reality of our 238 version of what our 239 problems are. 
We 240 
are trying to recognize that we 241 have been given the answer by rec¬ 
ognizing the problem, so that the problem and the answer can be 
brought together, and we 242 can be at peace. 



233 Handwritten mark-up suggests (today). 

2,4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (The). 

2,3 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 

236 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 

2,7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 

2 ’ s Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


239 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


240 Handwritten mark-up suggests (You). 


241 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you) 

242 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you) 


1159 


11-155 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 79 L 9. 
The shorter practice periods for today will not be set by 
time, but by need. 
You will see many problems today, each one call¬ 
ing for an answer. 
Our efforts will be directed toward recognizing 
that there is only one problem and one answer. 
In this recognition 
are all problems resolved. 
In this recognition there is peace. 
W(l59) 
w 79 L to. 
Be not deceived by the form of problems today. 
When¬ 
ever any difficulty seems to rise, tell yourself quickly: 

"Let me recognize this problem so it can be solved ." 

Then try to suspend all judgment about what the problem is. 
If pos¬ 
sible, close your eyes for a moment, and ask what it is. 
You will be 
heard and you will be answered. 
W(160) 


11-156 


1160 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 80 "Let me recognize my problems have been 
solved." 

W 80 L 1. 
If you are willing to recognize your problems, you will rec¬ 
ognize that you have no problems. 
Your one central problem has 
been answered, and you have no other. 
Therefore you must be at 
peace. 
Salvation does 243 depend 244 on recognizing this one problem, 
and understanding that it has been solved. 
One problem -- one so¬ 
lution. 
Salvation is accomplished. 
Freedom from conflict has been 
given you. 
Accept that fact, and you are ready to take your rightful 
place in God's plan for salvation. 


w 80 L 2. 
Your only problem has been solved! Repeat this over and 
over to yourself today, with gratitude and conviction. 
You have 
recognized your only problem, opening the way for the Holy Spirit 
to give you God's answer. 
You have laid deception aside, and seen 
the light of truth. 
You have accepted salvation for yourself by 
bringing the problem to the answer. 
And you can recognize the an¬ 
swer because the problem has been identified. 


w 80 L 3. 
You are entitled to peace today. 
A problem that has been 
resolved cannot trouble you. 
Only be certain you do not forget that 
all problems are the same. 
Their many forms will not deceive you 
while you remember this. 
One problem —one solution. 
Accept the 
peace this simple statement brings. 


W 80 L 4. 
In our longer practice periods today, we will claim the 
peace that must be ours when the problem and the answer have 
been brought together. 
The problem must be gone because God's 
answer cannot fail. 
Having recognized one, you have recognized 
the other. 
The solution is inherent in the problem. 
You are an¬ 
swered and have accepted the answer. 
You are saved. 
W(l6l) 

w 80 L 5. 
Now let the peace that your acceptance brings be given 
you. 
Close your eyes and receive your reward. 
Recognize that your 
problems have been solved. 
Recognize that you are out of conflict, 

241 Handwritten mark-up suggests (thus). 


244 Handwritten mark-up suggests (s). 



1161 


11-157 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


free and at peace. 
Above all, remember that you have one problem 
and that the problem has one solution. 
It is in this that the simplic¬ 
ity of salvation lies. 
It is because of this that it is guaranteed to 
work. 


W 80 L 6. 
Assure yourselves often today that your problems have 
been solved. 
Repeat the idea with deep conviction as frequently as 
possible. 
And be particularly sure to remember to apply the idea for 
today to any specific problem that may arise. 
Say quickly: 

"Let me recognize this problem has been solved." 

Let us be determined not to collect grievances today. 
Let us be de¬ 
termined to be free of problems that do not exist. 
The means is sim¬ 
ple honesty. 
Do not deceive yourself about what the problem is, 
and you must recognize it has been solved. 
W(162) 


11-158 


1162 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Review 2 (W 80 R2) 

Introduction 

W 80 R2 1 . 
We are now ready for another review. 
We will begin 
where our last review left off, and cover two ideas each day. 
The 
earlier part of the day will be devoted to one of these ideas, and the 
latter part of the day to the other. 
We will have one longer exercise 
period and frequent shorter ones in which we practice each of them. 


W 80 R2 2. 
The longer practice periods will follow this general form: 
Take about 15 minutes for each of them, and begin by thinking 
about the idea and the comments which are included in the assign¬ 
ments. 
Devote about 3 or 4 245 minutes to reading them over slowly, 
several times if you wish, and then close your eyes and listen. 
Re¬ 
peat the first phase if you find your mind wandering, but try to 
spend the major part of the practice period 246 listening quietly but 
attentively. 


W 80 R2 3. 
There is a message waiting for you. 
Be confident that you 
will receive it. 
Remember that it belongs to you, and that you want 
it. 
Do not allow your intent to waver in the face of distracting 
thoughts. 
Realize that, whatever form they 247 take, they have no 
meaning and no power. 
Replace them with your determination to 
succeed. 


W 80 R2 4. 
Do not forget that your will has power over fantasies and 
dreams. 
Trust it to see you through, and carry you beyond them all. 

Regard these practice periods as dedications to the way, the truth, 
and the life. 
248 Refuse to be side-tracked into detours, illusions, and 
thoughts of death. 
You are dedicated to salvation. 
Be determined 
each day not to leave your function unfulfilled. 



243 Handwritten mark-up suggests (some three or four). 


246 Handwritten mark-up suggests (time). 


247 Handwritten mark-up suggests(such thoughts may). 


242 John 14:6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. 
No one comes to the Father ex¬ 
cept through Me.” 


1163 


11-159 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 80 R2 5. 
Reaffirm your determination in the shorter practice peri¬ 
ods as well, and using the original form of the idea for general ap¬ 
plication, and a more specific form when needed. 
Some specific 
forms will be included in the comments. 
W(l63) These, however, are 
merely suggestions. 
It is not the particular words you use that mat¬ 
ter. 
W(164) 


11-160 


1164 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 81 Our ideas for review today are: (61-62) 

W 81 L 1. 
61. 
“I am the light of the world.” 

W 81 L 2. 
How holy am I, who have been given the function of light¬ 
ing up the world! Let me be still before my holiness. 
In its calm 
light let all my conflicts disappear. 
In its peace let me remember 
who I am. 


w 81 L 3. 
Some specific forms for applying the idea when specific 
difficulties seem to arise might be: 

"Let me not obscure the light of the world in me." 

"Let the light of the world shine through this appearance." 

"This shadow will vanish before the light." 

W 81 L 4. 
62. 
“Forgiveness is my function as the light of the world.” 

W 81 L 5. 
It is through accepting my function that I will see the light 
in me. 
And in this light will my function stand clear and perfectly 
unambiguous before my sight. 
My acceptance does not depend on 
my recognizing what my function is, for I do not yet understand 
forgiveness. 
Yet I will trust that in the light I will see it as it is. 


W 81 L 6. 
Specific forms for using the idea might include: 

"Let this help me learn what forgiveness means." 

"Let me not separate my function from my will." 

"I would not use this for an alien purpose." W(165) 


1165 


11-161 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 82 We will review these ideas today: (63-64) 

W 82 L 1. 
63. 
“The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my forgive¬ 
ness.” 

w 82 L 2. 
My forgiveness is the means by which the light of the 
world finds expression through me. 
My forgiveness is the means by 
which I become aware of the light of the world in me. 
My forgive¬ 
ness is the means by which the world is healed, together with my¬ 
self. 
Let me, then, forgive the world that it may be healed along 
with me. 


W 82 L 3. 
Suggestions for specific forms for applying this idea are: 

" Let 249 peace extend from my mind to yours, (name)" 

"I share the light of the world with you, (name)" 

"Through my forgiveness I can see this as it is." 

W 82 L 4. 
64. 
“Let me not forget my function.” 

W 82 L 5. 
I would not forget my function because I would remember 
my Self. 
I cannot fulfill my function by forgetting. 
250 And unless I 
fulfill my function, I will not experience the joy that God intends for 
me. 


w 82 L 6. 
Suitable specific forms of this idea include: 

"Let me not use this to hide my function from me." 

"I woidd use this as an opportunity to fulfill my function." 

"This may threaten my ego, hut cannot change my function in any 
way." W(166) 


249 Urtext manuscript has the word “to” crossed out; “Let t# peace ...” 

250 Handwritten mark-up suggests (if I forget it). 



11-162 


1166 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 83 Today let us review these ideas: (65-66) 

W 83 L 1. 
65. 
“My only function is the one God gave me.” 
w 83 L 2. 
I have no function but the one God gave me. 
This recogni¬ 
tion releases me from all conflict, because it means I cannot have 
conflicting goals. 
With one purpose only, I am always certain what 
to do, what to say, and what to think. 
All doubt must disappear 
and 251 1 acknowledge that my only function is the one God gave me. 

w 83 L 3. 
More specific applications of this idea might take these 
forms: 

"My perception of this does not change my function." 

"This does not give me a function other than the one God gave me." 
"Let me not use this to justify a function God did not give to me." 

W 83 L 4. 
66. 
“My happiness and my function are one.” 

W 83 L 5. 
All things that come from God are one. 
They come from 
Oneness, and must be received as one. 
Fulfilling my function is my 
happiness because both come from the same Source. 
And I must 
learn to recognize what makes me happy if I would find happiness. 


w 83 L 6. 
Some useful forms for specific applications of this idea are: 
"This cannot separate my happiness from my function." 

"The oneness of my happiness and my function remains wholly 
unaffected by this." 

"Nothing, including this, can justify the illusion of happiness apart 
from my function." W(167) 


251 Handwritten mark-up suggests (as). 
The handwriting appears different. 
This could be a correction. 



1167 


11-163 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 84 These are the ideas for today's review: (67-68) 

W 84 L 1. 
67. 
“Love created me like Itself.” 

W 84 L 2. 
I am in the likeness of my Creator. 
252 I cannot suffer, I can¬ 
not experience loss, and I cannot die. 
I am not a body. 
I would rec¬ 
ognize my reality today. 
I will worship no idols, nor raise my own 
self-concepts to replace my Self. 
I am in the likeness of my Creator. 

Love created me like Itself. 


W 84 L 3. 
You might find these specific forms helpful in applying the 
idea: 

"Let me not see an illusion of myself in this." 

"As I look on this, let me remember my Creator." 

"My Creator did not create this as I see it." 

W 84 L 4. 
68. 
“Love holds no grievances.” 

w 84 L 5. 
Grievances are completely alien to love. 
Grievances attack 
love, and keep its light obscure. 
If I hold grievances I am attacking 
love, and therefore attacking my Self. 
My Self thus becomes alien to 
me. 
I am determined not to attack my Self today, so that I can re¬ 
member who I am. 


w 84 L 6. 
These specific forms for applying this idea would be help¬ 


ful: 


"This is no justification for denying my Self." 
"I will not use this to attack love." 

"Let this not tempt me to attack myself." W( 168 ) 


2,2 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



11-164 


1168 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 85 Today's review will cover these ideas: (69-70) 

W 85 L 1. 
69. 
“My grievances hide the light of the world in me.” 

W 85 L 2. 
My grievances show me what is not there, and hide from 
me what I would see. 
Recognizing this, what do I want my griev¬ 
ances for? They keep me in darkness and hide the light. 
Grievances 
and light cannot go together, but light and vision must be joined for 
me to see. 
To see, I must lay grievances aside. 
I want to see, and 
this will be the means by which I will succeed. 


w 85 L 3. 
Specific applications of this idea might be made in these 
forms: 

"Let me not use this as a block to sight." 

"The light of the world will shine all this away." 

"I have no need for this. 
I want to see." 

W 85 L 4. 
70. 
“My salvation comes from me.” 

W 85 L 5. 
Today I will recognize where my salvation is. 
It is in me 
because its Source is there. 
It has not left its Source and so it cannot 
have left my mind. 
I will not look for it outside myself. 
It is not 
found outside and then brought in. 
But from within me it will reach 
beyond, and everything I see will but reflect the light that shines in 
me and in itself. 


w 85 L 6. 
These forms of the idea are suitable for more specific appli¬ 
cation 253 : 

"Let this not tempt me to look away from me for my salvation." 

"I will not let this interfere with my awareness of the Source of my 
salvation." 

"This has no power to remove salvation from me." W(169) 


253 Handwritten mark-up suggests (s). 



1169 


11-165 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 86 These ideas are for review today: (71-72) 

W 86 L 1. 
71 “Only God's plan for salvation will work.” 

w 86 L 2. 
It is senseless for me to search wildly about for salvation. 
I 
have seen it in many people and in many things, but when I reached 
for it, it was not there. 
I was mistaken about where it is. 
I was mis¬ 
taken about what it is. 
I will undertake no more idle seeking. 
Only 
God's plan for salvation will work. 
And I will rejoice because His 
plan can never fail. 


w 86 L 3. 
These are some suggested forms for applying this idea spe¬ 
cifically: 

"God's plan for salvation will save me from my perception of this." 
"This is no exception in God's plan for my salvation." 

"Let me perceive this only in the light of God’s plan for salvation." 

W 86 L 4. 
72 “Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation.” 

W 86 L 5. 
Holding grievances is an attempt to prove that God's plan 
for salvation will not work. 
Yet only His plan will work. 
By hold¬ 
ing grievances I am therefore excluding my own only hope of salva¬ 
tion from my awareness. 
I would no longer defeat my own best in¬ 
terests in this insane way. 
I would accept God's plan for salvation 
and be happy. 


W 86 L 6. 
Specific applications of this idea might be in these forms: 

"I am choosing between misperception and salvation as I look on this." 
"If I see grounds for grievances in this, I will not see the grounds for 
my salvation." 

"This calls for salvation, not attack." W(170) 


11-166 


1170 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 87 Our review today will cover these ideas: (73-74) 

W 87 L 1. 
73 “I will there be light.” 

W 87 L 2. 
I will use the power of my will today. 
It is not my will to 
grope about in darkness, fearful of shadows and afraid of things un¬ 
seen and unreal. 
Light shall be my guide today. 
I will follow it 
where it leads me, and I will look on only what it shows me. 
This 
day I will experience the peace of true perception, 
w 87 L 3. 
These forms of this idea would be helpful for specific appli¬ 
cations: 254 

"This cannot hide the light I will to see." 

"Yon stand with me in light, (name)" 

"In the light this will look different." 

W 87 L 4. 
74 “There is no will but God's.” 

w 87 L 5. 
I am safe today because there is no will but God's. 
I can 
become afraid only when I believe that there is another will. 
I try to 
attack only when I am afraid, and only when I try to attack can I be¬ 
lieve that my eternal safety is threatened. 
Today I will recognize 
that all this has not occurred. 
I am safe because there is no will but 
God's. 


w 87 L 6. 
These are some useful forms of this idea for specific appli¬ 
cations: 

"Let me perceive this in accordance with the Will of God." 

"It is God’s Will you are His Son (name), and mine as well." 

"This is part of God's Will for me, however I may see it." W(l7l) 


‘ The Urtext manuscript reads “application” in the singular, but both the Notes and FIP have it as 
plurar, so we do also. 



1171 


11-167 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 88 Today we will review these ideas: (75-76) 

W 88 L 1. 
75 “The light has come.” 

w 88 L 2. 
In choosing salvation rather than attack I merely choose to 
recognize what is already there. 
Salvation is a decision made al¬ 
ready. 
Attack and grievances are not there to choose. 
That is why I 
always choose between truth and illusion; between what is there 
and what is not. 
The light has come. 
I can but choose the light, for 
it has no alternative. 
It has replaced the darkness, and the dark is 
gone. 


w 88 L 3. 
These would prove useful forms for specific applications of 
this idea: 

"This cannot show me darkness, for the light has come." 

"The light in you is all that I would see, (name)" 

"I umdd see in this only what is there." 

W 88 L 4. 
76 “I am under no laws but God's.” 

w 88 L 5. 
Here is the perfect statement of my freedom. 
I am under 
no laws but God's. 
I am constantly tempted to make up other laws, 
and give them power over me. 
I suffer only because of my belief in 
them. 
They have no real effect on me at all. 
I am perfectly free of 
the effects of all laws save God's. 
And His are the laws of freedom, 
w 88 L 6. 
For specific forms in applying this idea, these would be 
useful: 

"My perception of this shows me I believe in laws which do not exist." 
“I see only the laws of God at work in this." 

"Let me allow God’s laws to work in this, and not my own." W(172) 


11-168 


1172 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 89 These are our review ideas for today: (77-78) 

W 89 L 1. 
77 “I am entitled to miracles.” 

w 89 L 2. 
I am entitled to miracles because I am under no laws but 
God's. 
His laws release me from all grievances, and replace them 
with miracles. 
And I would accept the miracles in place of the 
grievances, which are but illusions that hide the miracles beyond. 

Now I would accept only what the laws of God entitle me to have, 
that I may use it on behalf of the function He has given me. 


w 89 L 3. 
You might use these suggestions for specific applications of 
this idea: 

"Behind this is a miracle to which I am entitled." 

"Let me not hold a grievance against you (name), but offer you the 
miracle that belongs to you instead." 

"Seen tndy, this offers me a miracle." 

W 89 L 4. 
78 “Let miracles replace all grievances.” 

W 89 L 5. 
By this idea do I unite my will with the Holy Spirit's, and 
perceive them as one. 
By this idea do I accept my release from hell. 

By this idea do I express my willingness to have all my illusions be 
replaced with truth, according to God's plan for my salvation. 
I 
would make no exceptions and no substitutes. 
I want all of Heaven 
and only Heaven, as God wills me to have. 


W 89 L 6. 
Useful specific forms for applying this idea would be: 

"l woidd not hold this grievance apart from my salvation." 

"Let our grievances be replaced by miracles, (name)" 

"Beyond this is the miracle by which all my grievances are replaced." 


W(173) 


1173 


11-169 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 90 For this review we will use these ideas: (79-80) 

W 90 L 1. 
79 “Let me recognize the problem so it can be solved.” 
w 90 L 2. 
Let me realize today that the problem is always some form 
of grievance which I would cherish. 
Let me also understand that the 
solution is always a miracle with which I let the grievance be re¬ 
placed. 
Today I would remember the simplicity of salvation by re¬ 
inforcing the lesson that there is one problem and one solution. 
The 
problem is a grievance; the solution is a miracle. 
And I invite the 
solution to come to me through my forgiveness of the grievance, 
and my welcome of the miracle which takes its place. 


W 90 L 3. 
Specific applications of this idea might be in these forms: 
"This presents a problem to me which I would have resolved." 

"The miracle behind this grievance will resolve it for me." 

"The answer to this problem is the miracle which it conceals." 

W 90 L 4. 
80 “Let me recognize my problems have been solved.” 

W 90 L 5. 
I seem to have problems only because I am misusing time. 


I believe that the problem comes first, and time must elapse before it 
can be worked out. 
I do not see the problem and the answer as si¬ 
multaneous in their occurrence. 
That is because I do not yet realize 
that God has placed the answer together with the problem, so that 
they cannot be separated by time. 
The Holy Spirit will teach me 
this, if I will let Him. 
And I will understand it is impossible that I 
could have a problem which has not been solved already. 


w 90 L 6. 
These forms of the idea will be useful for specific applica¬ 
tions: 

"I need not wait for this to be resolved." 

"The answer to this problem is already given me, if I will accept it." 

"Time cannot separate this problem from its solution ." W(l74) 


11-170 


1174 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 91 "Miracles are seen in light." 

W 91 L 1 . 
It is important to remember that miracles and vision neces¬ 
sarily go together. 
This needs repeating and frequent repeating. 
It 
is a central idea in your new thought system and the perception 
which it produces. 
The miracle is always there. 
Its presence is not 
caused by your vision; its absence is not the result of your failure to 
see. 
It is only your awareness of miracles that is affected. 
You will 
see it 255 in the light; you will not see it 256 in the dark. 


W 91 L 2. 
To you, then, light is crucial. 
While you remain in darkness 
the miracle remains unseen. 
Thus you are convinced it is not there. 

This follows from the premises from which the darkness comes. 

Denial of light leads to failure to perceive it. 
Failure to perceive 
light is to perceive darkness. 
The light is useless to you then, even 
though it is there. 
You cannot use it because its presence is un¬ 
known to you. 
And the seeming reality of the darkness makes the 
idea of light meaningless. 


W 91 L 3. 
To be told that what you do not see is there sounds like in¬ 
sanity. 
It is very difficult to become convinced that it is insanity not 
to see what is there, and to see what is not there instead. 
You do not 
doubt that the body's eyes can see. 
You do not doubt the images 
they show you are reality. 
Your faith lies in the darkness, not the 
light. 
How can this be reversed? For you it is impossible, but you 
are not alone in this . 
257 

w 91 L 4. 
Your efforts, however little they may be, have strong sup¬ 
port. 
Did you but realize how great 258 this strength, your doubts 
would vanish. 
Today we will devote ourselves to the attempt to let 
you feel this strength. 
When you have felt the strength in you, 
which makes all miracles within your easy reach, you will not 


235 Handwritten mark-up suggests (them). 


256 Handwritten mark-up suggests (them). 


2,7 Matthew 19:26 But Jesus looked at them and said to them, “With men this is impossible, but with 
God all things are possible.” 

25S Possibly this should be “how great is this strength.” The Notes has “how great this this strength” 
with the first “this” spelled out and crossed out, and the second being the shorthand glyph for “this” 
which suggests perhaps it originally was meant to be “is” rather than the first written out “this.” 


1175 


11-171 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


doubt. 
The miracles your sense of weakness hides will leap into 
awareness as you feel the 259 strength in you. 
W(175) September 21, 


1969 


w 91 L 5. 
Three times today, set aside about 10 260 minutes for a quiet 
time in which you try to leave your weakness behind. 
This is ac¬ 
complished very simply, as you instruct yourself that you are not a 
body. 
Faith goes to 261 what you want, and you instruct your mind 
accordingly. 
Your will remains your teacher, and your will has all 
the strength to do whatever 262 it desires. 
You can escape the body if 
you choose. 
You can experience the strength in you. 


W 91 L 6. 
Begin the longer practice periods with this statement of 
true cause and effect relationships: 

"Miracles are seen in light. 


The body's eyes do not perceive the light. 


But I am not a body. 
What am I?" 

The question with which this statement ends is needed for our exer¬ 
cises today. 
What you think you are is a belief to be undone. 
But 
what you really are must be revealed to you. 
The belief you are a 
body calls for correction, being a mistake. 
The truth of what you are 
calls on the strength in you to bring to your awareness what the mis¬ 
take concealed. 


w 91 L 7. 
If you are not a body, what are you? You need to be aware 
of what the Holy Spirit uses to replace the image of a body in your 
mind. 
You need to feel something to put your faith in, as you lift it 
from the body. 
You need a real experience of something else, some¬ 
thing more solid and more sure; more worthy of your faith, and 
really there. 


w 91 L 8. 
If you are not a body, what are you? Ask this in honesty, 
and then devote several minutes to allowing your mistaken 


259 Handwritten mark-up suggests (this). 


21,0 Handwritten mark-up suggests (ten). 


201 Handwritten mark-up suggests (with). 


262 The second part of the word “whatever” is crossed out by hand. 



11-172 


1176 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


thoughts about your attributes to be corrected, and their opposites 
to take their place. 
Say, for example: 

"I am not weak, but strong." 

"I am not helpless, but all powerful." 

"Iam not limited, but unlimited." 

"I am not doubtful, but certain." 

"I am not an illusion, but a reality." 

"I cannot see in darkness, but in light." W(l76) 
w 91L 9. 
In the second phase of the exercise period, try to experience 
these truths about yourself. 
Concentrate particularly on the experi¬ 
ence of strength. 
Remember that all sense of weakness is associated 
with the belief 263 you are a body, a belief that is mistaken and de¬ 
serves no faith. 
Try to remove your faith from it, if only for a mo¬ 
ment. 
You will become accustomed to keeping faith with the more 
worthy in you as we go along. 


w 91 L 10. 
Relax for the rest of the practice period, confident that 
your efforts, however meager, are fully supported by the strength of 
God and all His Thoughts. 
It is from Them your strength will come. 

It is through Their strong support that you will feel the strength in 
you. 
They are united with you in this practice period, in which you 
share a purpose like Their own. 
Theirs is the light in which you will 
see miracles, because Their strength is yours. 
Their strength be¬ 
comes your eyes, that you may see. 


W 91 L 11. 
Five or six times an hour, at reasonably regular intervals, 
remind yourself that miracles are seen in light. 
Also, be sure to meet 
temptation with today's idea. 
This form would be helpful for this 
special purpose: 

"Miracles are seen in light. 


Let me not close my eyes because of this." W(177) 


263 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



1177 


11-173 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 92 "Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength 
are one." 

w 92 L l. 
The idea for today is an extension of the previous one. 
You 
do not think of light in terms of strength and darkness in terms of 
weakness. 
That is because your idea of what seeing means is tied 
up with the body, and its eyes and brain. 
This is why you believe 
that you can change what you see by keeping 264 little bits of glass or 
other clear material before your eyes held in a frame or placed 
against the eye. 
These are 265 among the many magical beliefs that 
come from the conviction you are a body, and the body's eyes can 
see. 


W 92 L 2. 
You also believe the body's brain can think. 
If you but un¬ 
derstood the nature of thought, you could but laugh at this insane 
idea. 
It is as if you thought you held the match that lights the sun, 
and gives it all its warmth; or that you held the universe imprisoned 
in your hand, securely bound until you let it go. 
266 Yet this is no 
more foolish than to believe 267 the body's eyes can see; the brain can 


think. 
268 


W 92 L 3. 
It is God's strength in you that is the light in which you see, 
as it is His Mind with which you think. 
His strength denies your 
weakness. 
It is your weakness that sees through the body's eyes, 
peering about in darkness to behold the likeness of itself; the small, 
the weak, the sickly and the dying, those in need, the helpless and 
afraid, the sad, the poor, the starving and the joyless. 
These are seen 
through eyes which cannot see and cannot bless. 
269 


264 Handwritten mark-up suggests (putting). 


265 Handwritten mark-up suggests (This is). 
It would seem that the antecedent to the pronoun is singu¬ 
lar, making the handwritten suggestion a valid correction. 


266 Handwritten mark-up offers an alternative: (or that you held the world within your hand, securely 
bound ...) 

267 Handwritten mark-up suggests (think?). 


268 Handwritten mark-up suggests (know). 


269 Jeremiah 5:21 

Hear this now, O foolish people, 

Without understanding, 

Who have eyes and see not, 

And who have ears and hear not: 


11-174 


1178 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 92 L 4. 
Strength overlooks these things by seeing past appearances. 

It keeps its steady gaze upon the light that lies beyond them. 
It 
unites 270 with light, of which it is a part. 
It sees itself. 
It brings the 
light in which your Self appears. 
In darkness you perceive a self 
that is not there. 
W(l78) Strength is the truth about you; weakness is 
an idol falsely worshipped, and adored that strength may be dis¬ 
pelled, and darkness rule where God appointed that there should be 
light. 


W 92 L 5. 
Strength comes from truth, and shines with light its Source 
has given it; weakness reflects the darkness of its maker. 
It is sick 
and looks on sickness, which is like itself. 
Truth is a savior, and can 
only will for happiness and peace for everyone. 
It gives its strength 
to everyone who asks, in limitless supply. 
It sees that lack in anyone 
would be a lack in all, and so it gives its light that all may see, and 
benefit as one. 
Its strength is shared, that it may bring to all the 
miracle in which they will unite in purpose and forgiveness and in 
love. 


w 92 L 6. 
Weakness, which looks in darkness, cannot see a purpose 
in forgiveness and in love. 
It sees all others different from itself, and 
nothing in the world which it would share. 
It judges and condemns, 
but does not love. 
In darkness it remains to hide itself, and dreams 
that it is strong and conquering, a victor over limitations which but 
grow in darkness to enormous size. 
It fears and it attacks and hates 
itself, and darkness covers everything it sees, leaving it dreams as 
fearful as itself. 
No miracles are here, but only hate. 
It separates 
itself from what it sees, while light and strength perceive themselves 
as one. 


w 92 L 7. 
The light of strength is not the light you see. 
It does not 
change and flicker and go out. 
It does not shift from night to day 
and back to darkness 'til the morning comes again. 
The light of 


Mark 8:18 “Having eyes, do you not see? And having ears, do you not hear? And do you not remem¬ 
ber?” 

270 The Urtext manuscript has “united” which is corrected by handwritten mark-up to the form found in 
the Notes which is “unites.” FIP also has “unites.” 


1179 


11-175 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


strength is constant, sure as love, forever glad to give itself away 
because it cannot give but to Itself. 
No-one can ask in vain to share 
its sight, and none who enters its abode can leave without a miracle 
before his eyes, and strength and light abiding in his heart. 
W(179) 

W 92 L 8. 
The strength in you will offer you the light and guide your 
seeing, so you do not dwell on idle shadows which the body's eyes 
provide for self-deception. 
Strength and light unite in you, and 
where they meet your Self stands ready to embrace you as Its own. 

Such is the meeting place we try today to find and rest in, for the 
peace of God is where your Self, His Son, is waiting now to meet 
Itself again, and be as One. 


W 92 L 9. 
Let us give 20 271 minutes twice today to join this meeting. 

Let yourself be brought unto your Self. 
Its strength will be the light 
in which the gift of sight is given you. 
Leave, then, the dark a little 
while today, and we will practice seeing in the light, closing the 
body's eyes, and asking truth to show us how to find the meeting 
place of self and Self, where light and strength are one. 


W 92 L 10. 
After the morning meeting, 272 we will use the day in 
preparation for the time at night when we will meet again in hope 
and trust. 
Let us repeat as often as we can the idea for today, and 
recognize that we are being introduced to sight, and led away from 
darkness to the light where only miracles can be perceived. 
W(l80) 


71 Handwritten mark-up suggests (twenty). 


:7 - Handwritten mark-up suggests (Morning and evening we will practice thus.) 


11-176 


1180 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 93 "Light and joy and peace abide in me." 

w 93 L l. 
You think you are the home of evil, darkness and sin. 
You 
think if anyone could see the truth about you he would be repelled, 
recoiling from you as if from a poisonous snake. 
You think if what 
is true about you were revealed to you, you would be struck with 
horror so intense that you would rush to death by your own hand, 
living on after seeing this being impossible. 


w 93 L 2. 
These are beliefs so firmly fixed that it is difficult to help 
you see that they are based on nothing. 
That you have made mis¬ 
takes is obvious. 
That you have sought salvation in strange ways; 
have been deceived, deceiving and afraid of foolish fantasies and 
savage dreams; and have bowed down to idols made of dust; all this 
is true by what you now believe. 


W 93 L 3. 
Today we question this, not from the point of view of what 
you think, but from a very different reference point, from which 
such idle thoughts are meaningless. 
These thoughts are not accord¬ 
ing to God's Will. 
These weird 273 beliefs He does not share with you. 

This is enough to prove that they are wrong, but you do not per¬ 
ceive that this is so. 


w 93 L 4. 
Why would you not be overjoyed to be assured that all the 
evil which you think you did was never done, that all your "sins" 
are nothing; that you are as pure and holy as you were created, and 
that light and joy and peace abide in you? Your image of yourself 
cannot withstand the Will of God. 
You think that this is death, but it 
is life. 
You think you are destroyed, but you are saved. 


w 93 L 5. 
The self you made is not the Son of God. 
Therefore this self 
does not exist at all. 
And anything it seems to do and think means 
nothing. 
It is neither bad nor good. 
It is unreal, and nothing more 
than that. 
It does not battle with the Son of God. 
It does not hurt 
him, nor attack his peace. 
It has not changed creation, nor reduced 


273 The manuscript has a spelling error here “wierd” instead of “weird.” 


1181 


11-177 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


eternal sinlessness to sin and love to hate. 
What power can this self 
you made possess, when it would contradict the Will of God? W(l8l) 
w 93 L 6. 
Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God. 
Over and over this 
must be repeated until it is accepted. 
It is true. 
Your sinlessness is 
guaranteed by God. 
Nothing can touch it, nor can change what God 
created as eternal. 
The self you made, evil and full of sin, is mean¬ 
ingless. 
Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God, and light and joy 
and peace abide in you. 


w 93 L 7. 
Salvation requires the acceptance of but one thought; you 
are as God created you, not what you made of yourself. 
Whatever 
evil you may think you did, you are as God created you. 
Whatever 
mistakes you made, the truth about you is unchanged. 
Creation is 
eternal and unalterable. 
Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God. 


You are and will forever be exactly as you were created. 
Light and 
joy and peace abide in you because God put them there, 
w 93 L 8. 
In our longer exercise periods today, which would be most 
profitable if done for the first five minutes of every waking hour, we 
will begin by stating the truth about our 274 creation: 

"Light and joy and peace abide in me. 


My sinlessness is guaranteed by God." 

Then put away your foolish self-images, and spend the rest of the 
practice period in trying to experience what God has given you, in 
place of what you have decreed for yourself. 


w 93 L 9. 
You are what God created, or what you made. 
One Self is 
true; the other is not there. 
Try to experience the unity of your One 
Self. 
Try to appreciate Its holiness and the Love from Which 275 It 
was created. 
Try not to interfere with the Self Which God created as 
you by hiding Its majesty behind the tiny idols of evil and sinfulness 
you have made to replace It. 
Let It come into Its own. 
Here you are; 
This is you. 
And light and joy and peace abide in you because this 
is so. 
W(182) 


274 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


277 The capitalization of “Love” and “Which” is written in by hand in the manuscript. 



11-178 


1182 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 93 L 10. 
You may not be willing or even able to use the first five 
minutes of each hour for these exercises. 
Try, however, to do so 
when you can. 
At least remember to repeat these thoughts each 
hour: 

"Light and joy and peace abide in me. 


My sinlessness is guaranteed by God." 

Then try to devote at least a minute or so to closing your eyes and 
realizing that this is a statement of the truth about you. 


W 93 L 11. 
If a situation arises which seems to be disturbing, quickly 
dispel the illusion of fear by repeating these thoughts again. 
Should 
you be tempted to become angry with someone, 276 tell him silently: 

"Light and joy and peace abide in you. 


Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God." 

W 93 L 12. 
You can do much for the world's salvation today. 
You can 
do much today to bring you closer to 277 the part in salvation which 
God has assigned to you. 
And you can do much today to bring the 

conviction to your mind that the idea for the day is true indeed. 

W(183) 


September 24, 1969 


276 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one) as in “someone”. 
Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed 
“some”. 
In the Notes it is “someone.” 

277 Handwritten mark-up suggests (accepting). 



1183 


11-179 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 94 "I am as God created me." 

W 94 L 1. 
Today we continue with the one idea which brings com¬ 
plete salvation; the one statement which makes all forms of tempta¬ 
tion powerless; the one thought which renders the ego silent and 
entirely undone. 
You are as God created you. 
The sounds of this 
world are still, the sights of this world disappear, and all the 
thoughts which this world ever held are wiped away forever by this 
one idea. 
Here is salvation accomplished. 
Here is sanity restored. 


W 94 L 2. 
True light is strength, and strength is sinlessness. 
If you 
remain as God created you, you must be strong, and light must be in 
you. 
He Who ensured your sinlessness must be the guarantee of 
strength and light as well. 
You are as God created you. 
Darkness 
cannot obscure the glory of the Son of God. 
278 You stand in light, 
strong in the sinlessness in which you were created, and in which 
you will remain throughout eternity. 


w 94 L 3. 
Today we will again devote the first five minutes of each 
waking hour to the attempt to feel the truth in you. 
Begin these 
times of searching with these words: 

"I am as God created me. 


I am His Son eternally." 

Now try to reach the Son of God in you. 
This is the Self Which 
never sinned, nor made an image to replace reality. 
This is the Self 
Which never left Its home in God, to walk the world uncertainly. 

This is the Self Which knows no fear, nor could conceive of loss or 
suffering or death. 


w 94 L 4. 
Nothing is required 279 of you to reach this goal except to lay 
all idols and self-images aside; go past the long list of attributes, 
both "good" and "bad," you have ascribed to yourself; and wait in 
silent expectancy for the truth. 
God has Himself promised that it 


' Handwritten mark-up suggests (God's Son). 

219 Handwritten mark-up suggests (asked). 



11-180 


PROOF 


1184 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


will be revealed to all who ask for it. 
280 You are asking now. 
You 
will not fail because He cannot fail. 
W(l84) 

W 94 L 5. 
If you do not meet the requirement of practicing for the 
first five minutes of every hour, at least remind yourself hourly: 

"I am as God created me. 


I am His Son eternally." 

Tell yourself frequently today that you are as God created you. 
And 
be sure to respond to anyone who seems to irritate you with these 
words: 

"You are as God created You. 


You are His Son eternally." 

Make every effort to do the hourly exercises today. 
Each one you do 
will be a giant stride toward your release, and a milestone in learn¬ 
ing the thought system which this course sets forth. 
W(l85) 


80 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 


1185 


11-181 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 95 "I am One Self, united with My Creator." 

w 95 L l. 
Today's idea accurately describes you as God created you. 

You are one within yourself, and One with Him. 
Yours is the unity 
of all creation. 
Your perfect unity makes change in you impossible. 

You do not accept this, and you fail to realize it must be so, only be¬ 
cause you believe that you have changed yourself already. 


w 95 L 2. 
You see yourself as a ridiculous parody on God's creation, 
weak, vicious, ugly and sinful, miserable and beset with pain. 
Such 
is your version of your self; a self divided into many warring parts, 
separated from God, and tenuously held together by its erratic and 
capricious maker, to which you pray. 
It does not hear your prayers, 
for it is deaf. 
It does not see the Oneness 281 in you, for it is blind. 
It 
does not understand you are the Son of God, for it is senseless and 
understands nothing. 


w 95 L 3. 
We will attempt today to be aware only of what can hear 
and see, and what makes perfect sense. 
We will again direct our 
exercises toward reaching your One Self, which is united with Its 
Creator. 
In patience and in hope we try again today. 
The use of the 
first 5 282 minutes of every waking hour for practicing the idea for the 
day has special advantages at the stage of learning in which you are 
at present. 


W 95 L 4. 
It is difficult at this point not to allow your mind to wander 
if it undertakes extended attempts. 
283 To have surely realized this by 
now. 
You have seen the extent of your lack of mental discipline, 
and of your need for mind training. 
It is necessary that you be 
aware of this, for it is indeed a hindrance to your advance. 


W 95 L 5. 
Frequent but shorter practice periods have other advan¬ 
tages for you at this time. 
In addition to recognizing your difficul¬ 
ties with sustained attention, you must also have noticed that, 
unless you are reminded of your purpose frequently, you tend to 


281 Handwritten mark-up suggests (oneness). 


282 Handwritten mark-up suggests (five). 


283 Handwritten mark-up suggests (practicing). 



11-182 


1186 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


forget about it for long periods of time. 
You often fail to remember 
W(186) the short applications of the idea for the day, and you have 
not yet formed the habit of using it 284 as an automatic response to 
temptation. 


W 95 L 6. 
Structure, then, is necessary for you at this time, planned to 
include frequent reminders of your goal, and regular attempts to 
reach it. 
Regularity in terms of time is not the ideal requirement for 
the most beneficial form of practice in salvation. 
It is advantageous, 
however, for these whose motivation is inconsistent, and who re¬ 
main heavily defended against learning. 


w 95 L 7. 
We will therefore keep to the five minutes an hour practice 
periods for a while, and urge you to omit as few as possible. 
Using 
the first five minutes of the hour will be particularly helpful, since it 
imposes firmer structure. 
Do not, however, use your lapses from 
this schedule as an excuse not to return to it again as soon as you 
can. 


w 95 L 8. 
There may well be a temptation to regard the day as lost 
because you have already failed to do what is required. 
This 
should, however, merely be recognized as what it is; a refusal to let 
your mistakes 285 be corrected, and an unwillingness to try again. 


The Holy Spirit is not delayed in His teaching by your mistakes. 
He 
can be held back only by your unwillingness to let them go. 


W 95 L 9. 
Let us therefore be determined, particularly for the next 
week or so, to be willing to forgive ourselves for our lapses in dili¬ 
gence, and our failures to follow the instructions for practicing the 
day's idea. 
This tolerance for weakness will enable us to overlook it, 
rather than give it power to delay our learning. 
If we give it power 
to do this, we are regarding it as strength, and are confusing 
strength and weakness. 


W 95 L 10. 
When you fail to comply with the requirements of this 
course you have merely made a mistake. 
This calls for correction. 



s4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the idea). 

283 Handwritten mark-up suggests (mistake). 



PROOF " 87 COPY 


11-183 



Part 1 


and for nothing else. 
W(l87) To allow a mistake to continue is to 
make additional mistakes, based on the first, and reinforcing it. 
It is 
this process which must be laid aside, for it is but another way in 
which you would defend illusions against the truth. 


w 95 L ll. 
Let all these errors go by recognizing them for what they 
are. 
They are attempts to keep you unaware you are One Self, 
united with your Creator, at one with every aspect of creation, and 
limitless in power and in peace. 
This is the truth, and nothing else is 
true. 
Today we will affirm this truth again, and try to reach the 
place in you in which there is no doubt that only this is true. 
Begin 
the longer practice periods with this assurance, given 286 to your 
mind with all the certainty that you can give: 

"1 am One Self, united with my Creator, 

At one with every aspect of creation, 

And limitless in power and in peace." 
w 95 L 12. 
Then close your eyes and tell yourself again, slowly and 
thoughtfully, attempting to allow the meaning of the words to sink 
into your mind, replacing false ideas: 

"I am One Self " 

Repeat this several times, and then attempt to feel the meaning 
which the words convey. 
You are One Self, united and secure in 
light and joy and peace. 
You are God's Son, One Self with One 
Creator and one goal; to bring awareness of this Oneness to all 
minds, that true creation may extend the Allness and the Unity of 


God. 



w 95 L 13. 
You are One Self, complete and healed and whole, with 
power to lift the veil of darkness from the world, and let the light in 
you come through to teach the world the truth about itself. 
You are 
One Self, in perfect harmony with all there is and all that there will 
be. 
You are One Self, the holy Son of God, united with your broth¬ 
ers in this Self; united with your Father in His Will. 
W(188) 


s< ’ Handwritten mark-up suggests (offered?). 



11-184 


1188 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 95 L 14. 
Feel this One Self in you, and let It shine away all your il¬ 
lusions and your doubts. 
This is your Self, the Son of God Himself, 
sinless as Its Creator, with His strength within you, and His Love 
forever yours. 
You are One Self, and it is given you to feel this Self 
within you, and to cast all your illusions out of the One Mind Which 
is this Self, the holy truth in you. 


w 95 L 15. 
Do not forget today. 
We need your help, your little part in 
bringing happiness to all the world. 
And Heaven looks to you in 
confidence that you will try today. 
Share, then, its surety, for it is 
yours. 
Be vigilant. 
Do not forget today. 


W 95 L 16. 
Throughout the day do not forget your goal. 
Repeat to¬ 
day's idea as frequently as possible, and understand each time you 
do so, someone hears the voice of hope, the stirring of the truth 
within his mind, the gentle rustling of the wings 287 of peace. 
Your 
own acknowledgment you are One Self, united with your Father, is 
a call to all the world, to be at one with you. 


w 95 L 17. 
To everyone you meet today be sure to give the promise of 
today's idea, and tell him this: 

"You are One Self with me, 

United with our Creator in this Self. 


I honor you because of what I am, 

And what He is, Who loves us both as one." W(189) 


287 Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed “winds” the d is changed to a g by hand. 
This appears to 
be a spelling correction. 
The Notes has “wings.” 


1189 


11-185 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 96 "Salvation comes from my One Self." 

w 96 L l. 
Although you are One Self, you experience yourself as two; 
as both good and evil, loving and hating, mind and body. 
This 
sense of being split into opposites induces feelings of acute and con¬ 
stant conflict, and leads to frantic attempts to reconcile the contra¬ 
dictory aspects of this self-perception. 
You have sought many such 
solutions, and none of them has worked. 
The opposites you see in 
you will never be compatible. 
But one exists. 


W 96 L 2. 
The fact that truth and illusion cannot be reconciled no 
matter how you try, what means you use and where you see the 
problem, must be accepted if you would be saved. 
Until you have 
accepted this, you will attempt an endless list 288 of goals you cannot 
reach; a senseless series of expenditures of time and effort, hopeful¬ 
ness and doubt, each one as futile as the one before, and failing as 
the next one surely will. 


W 96 L 3. 
Problems which have no meaning cannot be resolved 
within the framework they are set. 
Two selves in conflict could not 
be resolved, and good and evil have no meeting place. 
The self you 
made can never be your Self, nor can your Self be split in two and 
still be what it is, and must forever be. 


W 96 L 4. 
A mind and body cannot both exist. 
Make no attempt to 
reconcile the two, for one denies the other can be real. 
If you are 
physical your mind is gone from your self-concept, for it has no 
place in which it could be really part of you. 
If you are Spirit, then 
the body must be meaningless to your reality, 
w 96 L 5. 
Spirit makes use of mind as means to find Its Self- 
expression. 
And the mind that serves the Spirit is at peace and filled 
with joy. 
Its power comes from Spirit, and it is fulfilling happily its 
function here. 
Yet mind can also see itself divorced from Spirit, and 
perceive itself within a body it confuses with itself. 
Without its 


ss Originally typed “endless lists.” Handwritten mark-up suggests (an endless list). 
The Notes has “an 
endless list.” 


11-186 


1190 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


function then, it has no peace, and happiness is alien to its thoughts. 

W(190) 

W 96 L 6. 
Yet mind apart from Spirit cannot think. 
It has denied its 
Source of strength, and sees itself as helpless, limited and weak. 

Dissociated from its function now, it thinks it is alone and separate, 
attacked by armies massed against itself, and hiding in the body's 
frail support. 
Now must it reconcile unlike with like, for this is 
what it thinks that it is for. 
Waste no more time on this. 
Who can 
resolve the senseless conflicts which a dream presents? What could 
the resolution mean in truth? What purpose could it serve? What is 
it for? 

W 96 L 7. 
Salvation cannot make illusions real, and solve a problem 
which does not exist. 
Perhaps you hope it can. 
Yet would you have 
God's plan for the release of His dear Son bring pain to him, and fail 
to set him free? Your Self retains Its Thoughts, and They remain 
within your mind and in the Mind of God. 
The Holy Spirit holds 
salvation in your mind, and offers it the way to peace. 


w 96 L 8. 
Salvation is a Thought you share with God, because His 
Voice accepted it for you, and answered in your name that it was 
done. 
Thus is salvation kept among the Thoughts your Self holds 
dear and cherishes for you. 
We will attempt today to find this 
Thought, Whose 289 presence in your mind is guaranteed by Him 
Who speaks to you from your One Self. 
Our hourly five minute 
practicing will be a search for Him within your mind. 
Salvation 
comes from this One Self through Him Who is the bridge between 
your mind and It. 


w 96 L 9. 
Wait patiently, and let Him speak to you about your Self, 
and what your mind can do, restored to It and free to serve Its Will. 

Begin by saying this: 

"Salvation comes from my One Self. 


Its Thoughts are mine to use." 


289 Handwritten mark-up suggests (thought, whose). 



1191 


11-187 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Then seek Its Thoughts, and claim them as your own. 
W(l9l) These 
are your own real thoughts you have denied, and let your mind go 
wandering in a world of dreams, to find illusions in their place. 


Here are your Thoughts, the only ones you have. 
Salvation is 
among Them; find it there. 


w 96 L to. 
If you succeed, the Thoughts that come to you will tell you 
you are saved, and that your mind has found the function that it 
sought to lose. 
Your Self will welcome it, and give it peace. 
Re¬ 
stored in strength, it will again flow out from Spirit to the Spirit in 
all things created by the Spirit as Itself. 
Your mind will bless all 
things. 
Confusion done, you are restored, for you have found your 


Self. 



w 96 L ll. 
Your Self knows that you cannot fail today. 
Perhaps your 
mind remains uncertain yet a little while. 
Be not dismayed by this. 

The joy your Self experiences. 
It will save for you, and it will yet be 
yours in full awareness. 
Every time you spend five minutes of the 
hour seeking Him Who joins your mind and Self, you offer Him an¬ 
other treasure to be kept for you. 


W 96 L 12. 
Each time today you tell your frantic mind salvation 
comes from your One Self, you lay another treasure in your growing 
store. 
And all of it is given everyone who asks for it, and will accept 
the gift. 
Think, then, how much is given unto you to give this day, 
that it be given you! W(192) 


11-188 


1192 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 97 "I am Spirit." 290 

w 97 L l. 
Today's idea identifies you with your One Self. 
It accepts 
no split identity, nor tries to weave opposing factors into unity. 
It 
simply states the truth. 
Practice this truth today as often as you can, 
for it will bring your mind from conflict to the quiet fields of peace. 

No chill of fear can enter, for your mind has been absolved of mad¬ 
ness, letting go illusions of a split identity. 


w 97 L 2. 
We state again the truth about your Self, the holy Son of 
God Who rests in you; Whose mind has been restored to sanity. 


You are the Spirit lovingly endowed with all your Father's Love and 
peace and joy. 
You are the Spirit Which completes Himself, and 
shares His Function as Creator. 
He is with you always, 291 as you are 
with Him. 


W 97 L 3. 
Today we try to bring reality still closer to your mind. 
Each 
time you practice, awareness is brought a little nearer at least; some¬ 
times a thousand years or more are saved. 
The minutes which you 
give are multiplied over and over, for the miracle makes use of time, 
but is not ruled by it. 
Salvation is a miracle, the first and last; the 
first that is the last, for it is one. 


w 97 L 4. 
You are the Spirit in Whose Mind abides the miracle in 
which all time stands still; the miracle in which a minute spent in 
using these ideas becomes a time which has no length 292 and which 
has no end. 
Give, then, these minutes willingly, and count on Him 
Who promised to lay timelessness beside them. 
He will offer all His 
strength to every little effort which 293 you make. 


w 97 L 5. 
Give Him the minutes which He needs today to help you 
understand with Him you are the Spirit that abides in Him, and 


" t| ° Originally typed “I am a Spirit.” Handwritten mark-up crosses out the “a”. 
The Notes also omits the 
“a.” 

291 Matthew 28:20 “Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with 
you always, even to the end of the age.” Amen. 


292 Handwritten mark-up suggests (limit). 


293 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



PROOF " 93 COPY 


11-189 



Part 1 


Which calls through His Voice to every living thing; offers His sight 
to everyone who asks; replaces errors with the simple truth. 
W(l93) 
w 97 L 6. 
The Holy Spirit will be glad to take five minutes of each 
hour from your hands, and carry them around this aching world 
where pain and misery appear to rule. 
He will not overlook one 
open mind that will accept the healing gifts they bring, and He will 
lay them everywhere He knows they will be welcome. 
And they 
will increase in healing power each time someone accepts them as 
his thoughts, and uses them to heal. 


W 97 L 7. 
Thus will your gifts 294 to Him be multiplied a thousand-fold 
and tens of thousands more. 
And when it is returned to you, it will 
surpass in might the little gift you gave as much as does the radi¬ 
ance of the sun outshine the tiny gleam a firefly makes an uncertain 
moment, and goes out. 
The steady brilliance of this light remains, 
and leads you out of darkness, nor will you be able to forget the way 
again. 


w 97 L 8. 
Begin these happy exercises with the words the Holy Spirit 
speaks to you, and let them echo round the world through Him: 

"Spirit am 1 , a holy Son of God, 

Free of all limits, safe and healed and whole, 

Free to forgive, and free to save the world." 

Expressed through you, the Holy Spirit will accept this gift which 
you received of Him, increase its power, and give it back to you. 


W 97 L 9. 
Offer each practice period today gladly to Him. 
And He 
will speak to you, reminding you that you are Spirit, one with Him 
and God, your brothers and your Self. 
Listen for His assurance 
every time you speak the word He offers you today, and let Him tell 
your mind that they are true. 
Use them against temptation, and es¬ 
cape its sorry consequences if you yield to the belief that you are 
something else. 
The Holy Spirit gives you peace today. 
Receive His 
words, and offer them to Him. 
W(194) 


294 Handwritten mark-up suggests (each gift) instead of “your gifts”. 



11-190 


1194 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 98 "I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation." 

w 98 L l. 
Today is a day of special dedication. 
We take a stand on 
but one side today. 
We side with the truth and let illusions go. 
We 
will not vacillate between the two, but take a firm position with the 
One. 
We dedicate ourselves to truth today, and to salvation as God 
planned it be. 
We will not argue it is something else, we will not 
seek for it where it is not. 
In gladness we accept it as it is, and take 
the part assigned to us by God. 


w 98 L 2. 
How happy to be certain! All our doubts we lay aside to¬ 
day, and take our stand with certainty of purpose, and with thanks 
that doubt is gone and surety has come. 
We have a mighty purpose 
to fulfill, and have been given everything we need with which to 
reach the goal. 
Not one mistake stands in our way. 
For we have 
been absolved of errors. 
All our sins are washed away by realizing 
that they were but mistakes. 


w 98 L 3. 
The guiltless have no fear, for they are safe and recognize 
their safety. 
They do not appeal to magic, nor invent escapes from 
fancied threats without reality. 
They rest in quiet certainty that they 
will do what it is given them to do. 
They do not doubt their own 
ability, because they know their function will be filled completely, in 
the perfect time and place. 
They took the stand which we will take 
today, that we may share their certainty, and thus increase it by ac¬ 
cepting it ourselves. 


w 98 L 4. 
They will be with us; all who took the stand we take today 
will gladly offer us all that they learned and every gain they made. 

Those still uncertain, too, will join with us, and borrowing our cer¬ 
tainty, will make it stronger still. 
While those as yet unborn will 
hear the call we heard, and answer it, when they have come to make 
their choice again. 
We do not choose but for ourselves today. 
W(l95) 
W 98 L 5. 
Is it not worth five minutes of your time each hour to be 
able to accept the happiness which God has given you? Is it not 
worth five minutes hourly to recognize your special function here? 

Is not five minutes of the hour but a small request in terms of a re- 


1195 


11-191 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


ward so great it has no measure? You have made a thousand losing 
bargains at the least. 


w 98 L 6. 
Here is an offer guaranteeing you your full release from 
pain of every 295 kind, and joy the world does not contain. 
You can 
exchange a little of your time for peace of mind and certainty of 
purpose, with the promise of complete success. 
And since time has 
no meaning, you are being asked for nothing in return for every¬ 
thing. 
Here is a bargain which you cannot lose. 
And what you gain 
is limitless indeed! 

W 98 L 7. 
Each hour today give Him your tiny gift of but five min¬ 
utes. 
He will give the words you use in practicing today's idea the 
deep conviction and the certainty you lack. 
His words will join with 
yours, and make each repetition of today's idea a total dedication, 
made in faith as perfect and as sure as His in you. 
His confidence in 
you will bring the light to all the words you say, and you will go 
beyond their sound to what they really mean. 


w 98 L 8. 
Today you practice with Him, as you say: 

"I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation. 
” 

In each five minutes that you spend with Him, He will accept your 
words and give them back to you all bright with faith and confi¬ 
dence so strong and steady they will light the world with hope and 
gladness. 
Do not lose one chance to be the glad receiver of His gifts, 
that you may give them to the world today. 
W(l96) 

w 98 L 9. 
Give Him the words, and He will do the rest. 
He will en¬ 
able you to understand your special function. 
He will open up the 
way to happiness, and peace and trust will be His gifts. 
His answer 
to your words. 
He will respond with all His faith and joy and cer¬ 
tainty that what you say is true. 
And you will have conviction then 
of Him Who knows the function that you have on earth as well as 
Heaven. 
296 He will be with you each practice period you share with 


295 Urtext manuscript has “very” which appears to be a mistake. 
It is “every” in the Notes. 

2% Matthew 6:10 “Your kingdom come. 
Your will be done On earth as it is in heaven." 


11-192 


1196 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Him, exchanging every instant of the time you offer Him for time¬ 
lessness and peace. 


W 98 L 10. 
Throughout the hour let your time be spent in happy 
preparation for the next five minutes you will spend again with 
Him. 
Repeat today's idea while you wait for the glad time to come 
to you again. 
Repeat it often, and do not forget each time you do so, 
you have let your mind be readied for the happy time to come. 


W 98 L 11. 
And when the hour is gone, 297 and He is there once more 
to spend a little time with you be thankful, and lay down all earthly 
tasks, all little thoughts and limited ideas, and spend a happy time 
again with Him. 
Tell Him once more that you accept the part 
which 298 He would have you take, and help you fill, and He will 
make you sure you want this choice, which He has made with you, 
and you with Him. 
W(197) 


297 Handwritten mark-up suggests (goes). 


298 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



1197 


11-193 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 99 "Salvation is my only function here." 

w 99 L l. 
Salvation and forgiveness are the same. 
They both imply 
that something has gone wrong; something you need be saved from 
or forgiven for; something amiss that needs corrective change, 
something apart or different from the Will of God. 
Thus do both 
terms imply something impossible but yet 299 which has occurred, 
resulting in a state of conflict 300 between what is and what could 
never be. 


W 99 L 2. 
Truth and illusions both are equal now, for both have hap¬ 
pened. 
The impossible becomes the thing you need forgiveness for; 
salvation from. 
Salvation is the borderland between truth and illu¬ 
sion. 
301 It 302 reflects the truth because it is the means by which you 
can escape illusions. 
Yet it is not truth because it undoes what was 
never done. 


w 99 L 3. 
How could there be a meeting place at all where earth and 
Heaven can be reconciled within a mind where both of them exist? 
The mind which sees illusions thinks them real. 
They have exis¬ 
tence in that they are thoughts. 
And yet they are not real because 
the mind that thinks these thoughts is separate from God. 


W 99 L 4. 
What joins the separated mind and thoughts with Mind 
and Thought which are forever One? What plan could hold the 
truth inviolate, yet recognize the need illusions bring, and offer 
means by which they are undone without attack, and with no touch 
of pain? What but a Thought of God could be this plan by which 
the never done is overlooked, and sins forgotten which were never 
real? 

w 99 L 5. 
The Holy Spirit holds this plan of God exactly as it was re¬ 
ceived of Him within the Mind of God, and in your own. 
It is apart 

299 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the thought of the impossible). 


’ 00 Handwritten mark-up suggests (now). 


’ ol Handwritten mark-up suggests (Salvation thus becomes a borderland which stands between the truth 
and fantasies.). 
The Notes originally states “Forgiveness is the borderland between truth and illusion.” 
The word “forgiveness” is crossed out after the “g,” and “Salvation” is written in, making it “For Salva¬ 
tion.” 

302 Handwritten mark-up suggests (now). 
That’s not in the Notes. 



11-194 


1198 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


from time in that its Source is timeless. 
Yet it operates in time be¬ 
cause of your belief that time is real. 
Unshaken does the Holy Spirit 
look on what you see; on sin and pain and death, on grief and sepa¬ 
ration and on loss. 
Yet does He know one thing must W(l98) still be 
true; God still is Love, and this is not His Will. 
303 
W 99 L 6. 
This is the Thought Which brings illusions to the truth, and 
sees them as appearances behind which is the changeless and the 
sure. 
This is the Thought Which saves and Which forgives, because 
It lays no faith in what is not created by the only Source It knows. 

This is the Thought Whose function is to save by giving you Its 
function as your own. 


w 99 L 7. 
Salvation is your function, with the One to Whom the plan 
was given. 
Now are you entrusted with this plan, along with Him. 

He has one answer to appearances regardless of their form, their 
size, their depth, or any attribute they seem to have: 

"Salvation is my only function here. 


God still is Love, and this is not His Will." 
w 99 L 8. 
You who will yet work miracles, be sure you practice well 
the idea for today. 
Try to perceive the strength in what you say, for 
these are words in which your freedom lies. 
Your Father loves you. 

All the world of pain is not His will. 
Forgive yourself the thought 
He wanted this for you. 
Then let the Thought with Which He has 
replaced all your mistakes enter the darkened places of your mind 
which thought the thoughts that never were His Will. 
This part be¬ 
longs to God, as does the rest. 
It does not think its solitary thoughts 
and make them real by hiding them from Him. 


W 99 L 9. 
Let in the light, and you will look upon no obstacle to what 
He wills for you. 
Open your secrets to His kindly Light, and see 
how bright this Light still shines in you. 
Practice His Thought to- 


1 John 4:8 He who does not love does not know God, for God is love. 


1 John 4:16 And we have known and believed the love that God has for us. 
God is love, and he who 
abides in love abides in God, and God in him. 



1199 


11-195 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


day, and let His Light seek out and lighten up all darkened spots, 
and shine through them to join them to the rest, 
w 99 L to. 
It is God's will your mind be One with His. 
It is God's 
Will that He has but one Son. 
W(l99) It is God's Will that His one Son 
is you. 
Think of these things in practicing today, and start your 
longer practice periods with this instruction in the way of truth: 

"Salvation is my only function here. 


Salvation and forgiveness are the same." 

Then turn to Him who shares your function with you , 304 and let Him 
teach you what you need to learn to lay all fear aside, and know 
your Self as Love Which has no opposite in you. 

w 99 L ll. 
Forgive all thoughts which would oppose the truth of 
your completeness, unity and peace. 
You cannot lose the gifts your 
Father gave. 
You do not want to be another self. 
You have no func¬ 
tion that is not of God. 
Forgive yourself the one you think you 
made. 
Forgiveness and salvation are the same. 
Forgive what you 
have made, and you are saved. 


w 99 L 12. 
You have a special message for today which has the power 
to remove all forms of doubt and fear forever from your mind. 
If 
you are tempted to believe them true, remember that appearances 
can not withstand the truth these mighty words contain: 

"Salvation is my only function here. 


God still is Love, and this is not His Will." 
w 99 L 13. 
Your only function tells you you are One. 
Remind your¬ 
self of this between the times you give five minutes to be shared 
with Him Who shares God's plan with you. 
Remind yourself: 

"Salvation is my only finction here." 

Thus do you lay forgiveness on your mind, and let all fear be gently 
laid aside that Love may find Its rightful place in you, and show you 
that you are the Son of God. 
W(200) 


,04 Handwritten mark-up suggests (here?). 



11-196 


1200 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 100 "My part is essential to God's plan for salvation." 

w 100 L l. 
Just as God's Son completes his Father, so your part in it 
completes your Father's plan. 
Salvation must reverse the mad belief 
in separate thoughts and separate bodies which lead separate lives 
and go their separate ways. 
One function shared by separate minds 
unites them in one purpose, for each one is equally essential to them 


all. 



W 100 L 2. 
God's Will for you is perfect happiness. 
Why should you 
choose to go against His Will? The part that 305 He has saved for you 
to take in working out His plan is given you that you might be re¬ 
stored to what He wills. 
This part is as essential to His plan as to 
your happiness. 
Your joy must be complete to let His plan be un¬ 
derstood by those to whom He sends you. 
306 They will see their 
function in your shining face, and hear God calling to them in your 
happy laugh. 


w 100 L 3. 
You are indeed essential to God's plan. 
Without your joy 
His joy is incomplete. 
Without your smile the world cannot be 
saved. 
While you are sad the light which God Himself appointed 
as the means to save the world is dim and lusterless. 
And no-one 
laughs because all laughter can but echo yours. 
You are indeed es¬ 
sential to God's plan. 
Just as your light increases every light that 
shines in Heaven, so your joy on earth calls to all minds to let their 
sorrows go, and take their place beside you in God's plan. 


w loo L 4. 
God's messengers are joyous, and their joy heals sorrow 
and despair. 
They are the proof that God wills perfect happiness for 
all who will accept their Father's gifts as theirs. 
We will not let our¬ 
selves be sad today. 
For if we do, we fail to take the part that is es¬ 
sential to God's plan, as well as to our vision. 
Sadness is the sign 
that you would play another part, instead of what has been assigned 


’ <b Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 


306 John 15:11 “These things I have spoken to you, that My joy may remain in you, and that your joy 
may be complete.” 

John 16:24 “Until now you have asked nothing in My name. 
Ask, and you will receive, that your joy 
may be complete.” 


1201 


11-197 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


to you by God. 
Thus do you fail to show the world how great the 
happiness He wills for you. 
And so you do not recognize that it is 
yours. 
W(201) 

w too L 5. 
Today we will attempt to understand joy is our function 
here. 
If you are sad your part is unfulfilled, and all the world is 
thus deprived of joy, along with you. 
God asks that you be happy, 
so the world can see how much He loves His Son, and wills no sor¬ 
row rises to abate his joy; no fear besets him to disturb his peace. 


You are God's messenger today. 
You bring His happiness to all you 
look upon; His peace to everyone who looks on you, and sees His 
message in your happy face. 


W 100 L 6. 
We will prepare ourselves for this today in our five minute 
practice periods, by feeling happiness arise in us according to our 
Father's will and ours. 
Begin the exercises with the thought today's 
idea contains. 
Then realize your part is to be happy. 
Only this is 
asked of you or anyone who wants to take his place among God's 
messengers. 


W 100 L 7. 
Think what this means. 
You have indeed been wrong in 
your belief that sacrifice is asked. 
You but receive according to 
God's plan, and never lose or sacrifice or die. 
Now let us try to find 
that joy which proves to us and all the world God's Will for us. 
It is 
your function that you find it here, and that you find it now. 
For 
this you came. 
Let this one be the day that you succeed! 
w too L 8. 
Look deep within you, undismayed by all the little 
thoughts and foolish goals you pass as you ascend to meet the 
Christ in you. 
He will be there. 
And you can reach Him now. 
What 
could you rather look upon in place of Him who waits that you may 
look on Him? What little thought has power to hold you back? 

What foolish goal can keep you from success when He Who calls to 
you is God Himself? 

w too L 9. 
He will be there. 
You are essential to His plan. 
You are 
His messenger today, and you must find what He would have you 
give. 
W(202) Do not forget the idea for today between your longer 
practice periods. 
It is your Self who calls to you today. 
And it is 


11-198 


1202 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Him you answer every time you tell yourself you are essential to 
God's plan for the salvation of the world. 
W(203) 


1203 

PROOF COPY 


11-199 


Part 1 


Lesson 101 "God's will for me is perfect happiness." 

w 101 L l. 
Today we will continue with the theme of happiness. 
This 
is a key idea in understanding what salvation means. 
You still be¬ 
lieve it asks for suffering as penance for your "sins." This is not so. 

Yet you must think it so while you believe that sin is real, and that 
God's Son can sin. 


W 101 L 2. 
If sin is real then punishment is just, and cannot be es¬ 
caped. 
Salvation thus cannot be purchased but through suffering. 


If sin is real then happiness must be illusion, for they cannot both be 
true. 
The sinful warrant only death and pain, and it is this they ask 
for, for they know it waits for them and it will seek them out and 
find them somewhere, sometime, in some form which evens the ac¬ 
count they owe to God. 
They would escape Him in their fear. 
And 
yet He will pursue, and they can not escape. 


w 101L 3. 
If sin is real, salvation must be pain. 
Pain is the cost of sin, 
and suffering can never be escaped if sin is real. 
Salvation must be 
feared, for it will kill, but slowly, taking everything away before it 
grants the welcome boon of death 307 to victims who are little more 
than bones before salvation is appeased. 
Its wrath is boundless, 
merciless, but wholly just. 


w 101L 4. 
Who would seek out such savage punishment? Who 
would not flee salvation, and attempt in every way he can to drown 
the Voice Which offers it to him? Why would he try to listen, and 
accept Its offering? If sin is real Its offering is death, and meted out 
in cruel form to match the vicious wishes in which sin is born. 
If sin 
is real salvation has become your bitter enemy, the curse of God 
upon you who have crucified His Son. 


W101L5. 
You need the practice periods today. 
The exercises teach 
sin is not real, and all that you believe must come from sin will 
never happen, for it has no cause. 
Accept atonement with an open 


’" 7 The Urtext manuscript ends the sentence here and starts a new one, making the next clause a sen- 
tence with no verb unless the next period, after appeased, is removed. 
FIP changes it as we do. 
This is 
also the reading in the Notes. 



11-200 


1204 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


mind which cherishes no lingering belief that you have made a devil 
of God's Son. 
W(204) 

w lot L 6. 
There is no sin. 
We practice with this thought as often as 
we can today, because it is the basis for today's idea. 
God's Will for 
you is perfect happiness because there is no sin, and suffering is 
causeless. 
Joy is just, and pain is but the sign you have misunder¬ 
stood yourself. 


W 101 L 7. 
Fear not the Will of God. 
But turn to It in confidence that 
It will set you free from all the consequences sin has wrought in fe¬ 
verish imagination. 
Say: 

"God’s Will for me is perfect happiness. 


There is no sin; it has no consequence." 

So should you start your practice periods, and then attempt again to 
find the joy these thoughts will introduce into your mind. 
Give 
these five minutes gladly, to remove the heavy load you laid upon 
yourself with the insane belief that sin is real. 


W101L8. 
Today escape from madness. 
You are set on freedom's 
road, and now today's idea brings wings to speed you on, and hope 
to go still faster to the waiting goal of peace. 
There is no sin. 
Re¬ 
member this today, and tell yourself as often as you can: 

"God’s Will for me is perfect happiness. 


This is the truth because there is no sin.” W(205) 


1205 

PROOF COPY 


11-201 


Part 1 


Lesson 102 "I share God's Will for happiness for me." 

w 102 Ll. 
You do not want to suffer. 
You may think it buys you 
something, and may still believe a little that it buys you what you 
want. 
Yet this belief is surely shaken now, at least enough to let you 
question it, and to suspect it really makes no sense. 
It has not gone 
as yet, but lacks the roots that once secured it tightly to the dark and 
hidden secret places of your mind. 


w 102 L 2. 
Today we try to loose its weakened hold still further and 
to realize that pain is purposeless, without a cause, and with no 
power to accomplish anything. 
It cannot purchase anything at all. 


It offers nothing, and does not exist, 308 and everything you think it 
offers you is lacking in existence like itself. 
You have been slave to 
nothing. 
Be you free today to join the happy Will of God. 


w 102 L 3. 
For several days we will continue to devote our longer 
practice periods to exercises planned to help you reach the happi¬ 
ness God's Will has placed in you. 
Here is your home, and here 
your safety is. 
Here is your peace, and here there is no fear. 
Here is 
salvation. 
Here is rest at last. 


w 102 L 4. 
Begin the longer practice periods today with this accep¬ 
tance of God's Will for you: 

"I share God's Will for happiness for me, 

And I accept it as my function now." 

Then seek this function deep within your mind, for it is there, await¬ 
ing but your choice. 
You cannot fail to find it when you learn it is 
your choice, and that you share God's Will. 
W(206) 

W 102 L 5. 
Be happy, for your only function here is happiness. 
You 
have no need to be less loving to God's Son than He Whose Love 
created him as loving as Himself. 
Besides these hourly five minute 
rests, pause frequently today to tell yourself that you have now ac¬ 
cepted happiness as your one function. 
And be sure that you are 
joining with God's Will in doing this. 
W(207) 


308 Urtext manuscript begins new sentence here, corrected in handwriting to a comma instead of period. 



11-202 


1206 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 103 "God, being Love, is also happiness." 

w 103 L l. 
Happiness is an attribute of love. 
It cannot be apart from 
it, nor can it be experienced where love is not. 
Love has no limits, 
being everywhere. 
And therefore joy is everywhere as well. 
Yet can 
the mind deny that this is so, believing there are gaps in love where 
sin can enter, bringing pain instead of joy. 
This strange belief would 
limit happiness by redefining love as limited, and introducing op¬ 
position in what has no limit and no opposite. 


w 103 L 2. 
Fear is associated then with love, and its results become 
the heritage of minds which think what they have made is real. 

These images, with no reality in truth, bear witness to the fear of 
God, forgetting being Love. 
309 He must be joy. 


This basic error we will try again to bring to truth today, and teach 
ourselves: 

"God, being Love, is also happiness. 


To fear Him is to be afraid of joy." 

Begin your longer exercises for 310 today with this association, which 
corrects the false belief that God is fear. 
It also emphasizes happi¬ 
ness belongs to you because of what He is. 


W 103 L 3. 
Allow this one correction to be placed within your minds 
each waking hour today. 
Then welcome all the happiness it brings, 
as truth replaces fear, and joy becomes what you expect to take the 
place of pain. 
God being Love, it will be given you. 
Bolster this ex¬ 
pectation frequently throughout the day, and quiet all your fears 
with this assurance, kind and wholly true: 

"God, being Love, is also happiness. 


And it is happiness I seek today. 


I cannot fail, because I seek the truth." W(208) 


309 The manuscript has a comma handwritten in. 
In the Notes, legibility is an issue but word spacing 
suggests a period was intended and that certainly seems to make the most sense. 
FIP keeps the comma. 


310 Handwritten mark-up suggests (practice periods). 



1207 


11-203 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 104 "I seek but what belongs to me in truth." 

W 104 L 1 . 
Today's idea continues with the thought that joy and 
peace are not but idle dreams. 
They are your right, because of what 
you are. 
They come to you from God, Who cannot fail to give you 
what He wills. 
Yet must there be a place made ready to receive His 
gifts. 
They are not welcomed gladly by a mind which has instead 
received the gifts it made where His belong, as substitutes for them, 
w 104 L 2. 
Today we would remove all meaningless and self-made 
gifts which we have placed upon the holy altar where God's gifts 
belong. 
These 311 are the gifts which are our own in truth. 
These 312 
are the gifts which we inherited before time was, and which will still 
be ours when time has passed into eternity. 
These 313 are the gifts 
which are within us now, for they are timeless. 
And we need not 
wait to have them. 
They belong to us today. 
Therefore we will to 
have them now, and know in choosing them in place of what we 
made, we but unite our will with what God wills, and recognize the 
same as being One. 


W 104 L 3. 
Our longer practice periods today, the hourly five minutes 
given to the truth for your salvation, should begin with this: 

"1 seek but what belongs to me in truth." 

And joy and peace are my inheritance." 

Then lay aside the conflicts of the world which offer other gifts and 
other goals made of illusions, witnessed to by them, and sought for 
only in a world of dreams. 


w 104 L 4. 
All this we lay aside, and seek instead that which is truly 
ours, as we ask to recognize what God has given us. 
We clear a holy 
place within our minds before His altar, where His gifts of peace 
and joy are welcome, and to which we come to find what has been 
given us by Him. 
We come in confidence today, aware that what 


311 Handwritten mark-up suggests (His). 


3 Handwritten mark-up suggests (His). 

’ 13 Handwritten mark-up suggests (His). 



11-204 


1208 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


belongs to us in truth is what He gives. 
And we would wish for 
nothing else, for nothing else belongs to us in truth. 
W(209) 
w 104 L 5. 
So do we clear the way for Him today by simply recogniz¬ 
ing that His Will is done already, and that joy and peace belong to 
us as His eternal gifts. 
We will not let ourselves lose sight of them 
between the times we come to seek for them where He has laid 
them. 
This reminder will we bring to mind as often as we can: 

"I seek but what belongs to me in truth. 


God's gifts of joy and peace are all I want." W(210) 


1209 


11-205 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 105 "God's peace and joy are mine." 

w 105 L l. 
God's peace and joy are yours. 
Today we will accept 
them, knowing they belong to us. 
And we will try to understand 
these gifts increase as we receive them. 
They are not like to the gifts 
the world can give, in which the giver loses as he gives the gift; the 
taker is the richer by his loss. 
These 314 are not gifts, but bargains 
made with guilt. 
The truly given gift entails no loss. 
It is impossible 
that one can gain because another loses. 
This implies a limit and an 
insufficiency. 


w 105 L 2. 
No gift is given thus. 
Such "gifts" are but a bid for a more 
valuable return; a loan with interest to be paid in full; a temporary 
lending, meant to be a pledge of debt to be repaid with more than 
was received by him who took the gift. 
This strange distortion of 
what giving means pervades all levels of the world you see. 
It strips 
all meaning from the gifts you give, and leaves you nothing in the 
ones you take. 


w 105 L 3. 
A major learning goal this course has set is to reverse your 
view of giving, so you can receive. 
For giving has become a source 
of fear, and so you would avoid the only means by which you can 
receive. 
Accept God's peace and joy, and you will learn a different 
way of looking at a gift. 
God's gifts will never lessen when they are 
given away. 
They but increase thereby. 
As Heaven's peace and joy 
intensify when you accept them as God's gift to you, so does the joy 
of your Creator grow when you accept His joy and peace as yours, 
w 105 L 4. 
True giving is creation. 
It extends the limitless to the 
unlimited, eternity to timelessness, and love unto itself. 
It adds to 
all that is complete already, not in simple terms of adding more, for 
that implies that it was less before. 
It adds by letting what cannot 
contain itself fulfill its aim of giving everything it has away, secur¬ 
ing it forever for itself. 
W(211) 


314 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Such). 



11-206 


1210 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 105 L 5. 
Today accept God's peace and joy as yours. 
Let Him com¬ 
plete Himself as He defines completion. 
You will understand that 
what completes Him must complete His Son as well. 
He cannot 
give through loss. 
No more can you. 
Receive His gift of joy and 
peace today, and He will thank you for your gift to Him. 

w 105 L 6. 
Today our practice periods will start a little differently. 

Begin today by thinking of those brothers who have been denied by 
you the peace and joy which are their right under the equal laws of 
God. 
Here you denied them to yourself. 
And here you must return, 
to claim them as your own. 
Think of your "enemies" a little while, 
and tell each one as he occurs to you: 

"My brother, peace and joy I offer yon, 

That I may have God’s peace and joy as mine." 

w 105 L 7. 
Thus you prepare yourself to recognize God's gifts to you, 
and let your mind be free of all that would prevent success today. 

Now are you ready to accept the gift of peace and joy which God 
has given you. 
Now are you ready to experience the joy and peace 
you have denied yourself. 
Now you can say "God's peace and joy 
are mine," for you have given what you would receive. 


w 105 L 8. 
You must succeed today if you prepare your mind as we 
suggest, for you have let all bars to peace and joy be lifted up, and 
what is yours can come to you at last. 
So tell yourself "God's peace 
and joy are mine," and close your eyes a while, and let His Voice 
assure you that the words you speak are true. 


W 105 L 9. 
Spend your five minutes thus with Him each time you can 
today, but do not think that less is worthless when you cannot give 
Him more. 
At least remember hourly to say the words which call 
on Him to give you what He wills to give, and wills you to receive. 

W(212) Determine not to interfere today with what He wills. 
And if a 
brother seems to tempt you to deny God's gift to him, see it as but 
another chance to let yourself receive the gifts of God as yours. 


Then bless your brother thankfully, and say: 

"My brother, peace and joy I offer you, 

That I may have God’s peace and joy as mine." W(213) 


1211 


11-207 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 106 "Let me be still and listen to the truth." 315 

w 106 L l. 
If you will lay aside the ego's voice however loudly it may 
seem to call; if you will not accept its petty gifts which give you 
nothing that you really want; if you will listen with an open mind 
which 316 has not told you what salvation is; then you will hear the 
mighty Voice of truth, quiet in power, strong in stillness, and com¬ 
pletely certain in Its messages. 
Listen, and hear your Father speak 
to you through His appointed Voice, Which silences the thunder of 
the meaningless, and shows the way to peace to those who cannot 
see. 


w 106 L 2. 
Be still today and listen to the truth. 
Be not deceived by 
voices of the dead which tell you they have found the source of life, 
and offer it to you for your belief. 
Attend them not, but listen to the 
truth. 
Be not afraid today to circumvent the voices of the world. 

Walk lightly past their meaningless persuasion. 
Hear them not. 


W 106 L 3. 
Be still today and listen to the truth. 
Go past all things 
which do not speak of Him Who holds your happiness within His 
hand, held out to you in welcome and in love. 
Hear only Him to¬ 
day, and do not wait to reach Him longer. 
Hear one Voice today, 
w 106 L 4. 
Today the promise of God's Word is kept. 
Hear and be 
silent. 
He would speak to you. 
He comes with miracles a thousand 
times as happy and as wonderful as those you ever dreamt 317 or 
wished for in your dreams. 
His miracles are true. 
They will not 
fade when dreaming ends. 
They end the dream instead, and last 
forever for they come from God, to His dear Son, whose other name 
is you. 
Prepare yourself for miracles today. 
Today allow your Fa¬ 
ther's ancient pledge to you and all your brothers to be kept. 


W 106 L 5. 
Hear Him today, and listen to the Word which lifts the 
veil which 318 lies upon the earth, and wakes all those who sleep and 


315 Psalm 46:10 Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth! 

316 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


317 Handwritten mark-up suggests (dreamed). 


318 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



11-208 


1212 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


cannot see. 
God calls to them through you. 
He needs your voice to 
speak to them, for who could reach God's Son except his Father call¬ 
ing through your Self? W(214) 

w 106 L 6. 
Hear Him today, and offer Him your voice to speak to all 
the multitudes who wait to hear the Word that He will speak today. 

Be ready for salvation. 
It is here, and will today be given unto you. 

And you will learn your function from the One Who shows 319 it in 
your Father's Name for you. 


w 106 L 7. 
Listen today, and you will hear a Voice Which will re¬ 
sound throughout the world through you. 
The Bringer of all mira¬ 
cles has need that you receive them first, and thus become the joy¬ 
ous giver of what you received. 
Thus does salvation start and thus 
it ends; when everything is yours, and everything is given away, it 
will remain with you forever. 
And the lesson has been learned, 
w 106 L 8. 
Today we practice giving, not the way you understand it 
now, but as it is. 
The longer 320 exercises should begin with this re¬ 
quest for your enlightenment: 

"I will be still and listen for the truth. 


What does it mean to give and to receive?” 

Ask and expect an answer. 
Your request is one whose answer has 
been waiting long to be received by you. 
It will begin the ministry 
for which you came, and which will free the world from thinking 
giving is a way to lose. 
And so the world becomes ready to under¬ 
stand and to receive. 


W 106 L 9. 
Be still and listen to the truth today. 
For each five minutes 
spent in listening a thousand minds are opened to the truth, and 321 
they will hear the holy Word you hear. 
And when the hour is past, 
you will again release a thousand more who pause to ask that truth 
be given them, along with you. 



’ 1 ‘ 5 While the Urtext manuscript has “shows” typed initially, it is corrected with handwriting to “chose” 
which is the form found in the Notes. 


320 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Each hour's). 


321 The manuscript originally has a sentence break here rather than a comma. 
The shift to a comma is 
written in by hand, obviously correct, and thus retained. 



1213 


11-209 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 106 L 10. 
Today the holy Word of God is kept through your receiv¬ 
ing it to give away, so you can teach the world what giving means 
by listening and learning it of Him. 
Do not forget today to reinforce 
your choice to hear and to receive the Word by your 322 reminder, 
given to yourself as often as is possible today: 

"Let me be still and listen to the truth. 


I am the messenger of God today, 

My voice is His, to give what I receive." W(215) W(216) 


’ 2 Handwritten mark-up suggests (this). 



11-210 


1214 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 107 "Truth will correct the 323 errors in my mind." 

W 107 L 1 . 
What can correct illusions but the truth? And what are 
errors but illusions which remain unrecognized for what they are? 
Where truth has entered errors disappear. 
They merely vanish, 
leaving not a trace by which to be remembered. 
They are gone be¬ 
cause without belief they have no life, and so they disappear to 
nothingness, returning whence they came. 
From dust to dust they 
come and go, for only truth remains . 
324 

W 107 L 2. 
Can you imagine what a state of mind without illusions is? 
How it would feel? Try to remember when there was a time, - per¬ 
haps a minute, maybe even less, - when nothing came to interrupt 
your peace; when you were certain you were loved and safe. 
Then 
try to picture what it would be like to have that moment be ex¬ 
tended to the end of time and to eternity. 
Then let the sense of quiet 
that you felt be multiplied a hundred times, and then be multiplied 
another hundred more. 


W 107 L 3. 
And now you have a hint, not more than just the faintest 
intimation of the state your mind will rest in when the truth has 
come. 
Without illusions there could be no fear, no doubt and no 
attack. 
When truth has come all pain is over, for there is no room 
for transitory thoughts and dead ideas to linger in your mind. 
Truth 
occupies your mind completely, liberating you from all beliefs in the 
ephemeral. 
They have no place because the truth has come, and 
they are nowhere. 
They cannot be found, for truth is everywhere 
forever now. 


W 107 L 4. 
When truth has come it does not stay a while, to disap¬ 
pear, or change to something else. 
It does not shift and alter in its 
form, nor come and go and go and come again. 
It stays exactly as it 
always was, to be depended on in every need, and trusted with a 
perfect trust in all the seeming difficulties and the doubts which the 


323 Handwritten mark-up suggests (all). 


324 Genesis 3:19 “By the sweat of your brow you will eat your food until you return to the ground, since 
from it you were taken; for dust you are and to dust you will return.” 


1215 


11-211 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


appearances the world presents engender. 
They will merely blow 325 
away when truth corrects the errors in your mind. 
W(217) 

W 107 L 5. 
When truth has come it harbors in its wings the gift of per¬ 
fect constancy, and love which does not falter in the face of pain but 
looks beyond it, steadily and sure. 
Here is the gift of healing, for the 
truth needs no defense, and therefore no attack is possible. 
Illusions 
can be brought to truth to be corrected. 
But the truth stands far be¬ 
yond illusions, and can not be brought to them to turn them into 
truth. 


W 107 L 6. 
Truth does not come and go nor shift nor change, in this 
appearance now and then in that, evading capture and escaping 
grasp. 
It does not hide. 
It stands in open light, in obvious accessi¬ 
bility. 
It is impossible that anyone could seek it truly and would not 
succeed. 
Today belongs to truth. 
Give truth its due, and it will give 
you yours. 
You were not meant to suffer and to die. 
Your Father 
wills these dreams be gone. 
Let truth correct them all. 


w 107 L 7. 
We do not ask for what we do not have. 
We merely ask 
for what belongs to us, that we may 326 recognize it as our own. 
To¬ 
day we practice on the happy note of certainty which has been born 
of truth. 
The shaky and unsteady footsteps of illusion is 327 not our 
approach today. 
We are as certain of success as we are sure we live 
and hope and breathe and think. 
We do not doubt we walk with 
truth today, and count on it to enter into all the exercises that we do 
this day. 


W 107 L 8. 
Begin by asking Him Who goes with you upon this under¬ 
taking that He be in your awareness as you go with Him. 
You are 
not made of flesh and blood and bone, but were created by the self- 


325 Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed "flow” the handwritten correction (blow) appears obvi- 
ously correct. 
In the Notes it is “blow.” 

326 Omitted in the Urtext manuscript, the word “may” is handwritten in. 
It is also the reading in the 
Notes. 


327 FIP changes “is” to “are” because the subject appears to be the plural “footsteps.” The subject can 
also be considered to be the phrase “the shaky and unsteady footsteps of illusion” which can be (and 
originally was) considered singular. 



11-212 


1216 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


same Thought Which gave the gift of life 328 to Him as well. 
He is 
your Brother, and so like to you your Father knows that you are 
both the same. 
It is your Self you ask to go with you, and how could 
He be absent where you are? W(218) 

W 107 L 9. 
Truth will correct all errors in your mind which tell you 
you could be apart from Him. 
You speak to Him today, and make 
your pledge to let His function be fulfilled through you. 
To share 
His function is to share His joy. 
His confidence is with you as you 
say: 

"Truth will correct all errors in my mind, 

And I will rest in Him who is my Self." 

Then let Him lead you gently to the truth which will envelop you 
and give you peace so deep and tranquil that you will return to the 
familiar world reluctantly. 


W 107 L 10. 
And yet you will be glad to look again upon this world. 

For you will bring with you the promise of the changes which the 
truth that goes with you will carry to the world. 
They will increase 
with every gift you give of five small minutes, and the errors which 
surround the world will be corrected as you let them be corrected in 
your mind. 


W 107 L 11. 
Do not forget your function for today. 
Each time you tell 
yourself with confidence, "Truth will correct all errors in my mind," 
you speak for all the world, and Him Who would release the world 
as He would set you free. 
W(219) 


328 Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed “light” the word (life) is handwritten in and probably 
correct. 
It is “life” in the Notes. 



1217 


11-213 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 108 "To give and to receive are one in truth." 

W 108 L 1 . 
Vision depends upon today's idea. 
The light is in it, for it 
reconciles all seeming opposites. 
And what is light except the reso¬ 
lution, born of peace, of all your conflicts and mistaken thoughts 
into one concept which is wholly true? Even that one will disappear 
because the Thought behind it will appear instead, to take its place. 

And now we are at peace forever, for the dream is over now. 


W 108 L 2. 
True light which makes true vision possible is not the light 
the body's eyes behold. 
It is a state of mind which has become so 
unified that darkness cannot be perceived at all. 
And thus what is 
the same is seen as one, while what is not the same remains unno¬ 
ticed, for it is not there. 


W 108 L 3. 
This is the light which shows no opposites, and vision, be¬ 
ing healed, has power to heal. 
This is the light which brings your 
peace of mind to other minds, to share it and be glad that they are 
one with you and with themselves. 
This is the light which heals be¬ 
cause it brings single perception, based upon one frame of reference 
from which one meaning comes. 


w 108 L 4. 
Here are both giving and receiving seen as different as¬ 
pects of one Thought Whose truth does not depend on which is seen 
as first, nor which appears to be in second place. 
Here it is under¬ 
stood that both occur together, that the Thought remains complete. 

And in this understanding is the base on which all opposites are 
reconciled, because they are perceived from the same frame of refer¬ 
ence which unifies this Thought. 


w 108 L 5. 
One thought, completely unified, will serve to unify all 
thought. 
This is the same as saying one correction will suffice for all 
correction, or that to forgive one brother wholly is enough to bring 
salvation to all minds. 
For these are but some special cases of one 
law which holds for every kind of learning, if it be directed by the 
One Who knows the truth. 
W(220) 

W 108 L 6. 
To learn that giving and receiving are the same has special 
usefulness, because it can be tried so easily and seen as true. 
And 


11-214 


1218 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


when this special case has proved it always works in every circum¬ 
stance where it is tried, the thought behind it can be generalized to 
other areas of doubt and double vision. 
And from there it will ex¬ 
tend, and finally arrive at the one Thought Which underlies them 


all. 



w 108 L 7. 
Today we practice with the special case of giving and re¬ 
ceiving. 
We will use this simple lesson in the obvious because it has 
results we cannot miss. 
To give is to receive. 
Today we will attempt 
to offer peace to everyone, and see how quickly peace returns to us. 

Light is tranquility, and in that peace is vision given us, and we can 
see. 


W 108 L 8. 
So we begin the practice periods with the instruction for 
today, and say: 

"To give and to receive are one in truth. 


I will receive what I am giving now." 

Then close your eyes, and for five minutes think of what you would 
hold out to everyone to have it yours. 
You might, for instance, say: 
"To everyone I offer quietness." 

"To everyone I offer peace of mind." 

"To everyone I offer gentleness." 

w 108 L 9. 
Say each one slowly, and then pause a while, expecting to 
receive the gift you gave, and it will come to you in the amount in 
which you gave it. 
You will find you have exact return, for this 329 is 
what you asked. 
It might be helpful, too, to think of one to whom to 
give your gifts. 
He represents the others, and through him you give 
to all. 
W(221) 

W 108 L 10. 
Our very simple lesson for today will teach you much. 

Effect and cause will be far better understood from this time on, and 
we will make much faster progress now. 
Think of the exercises for 


’ 9 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



1219 


11-215 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


today as quick advances in your learning, made still faster and more 
sure each time you say: 330 

"To give and to receive are one in truth." W( 222 ) 


330 In the Urtext manuscript this is a comma rather than a colon. 



11-216 


PROOF 


1220 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 109 "I rest in God." 

w 109 L l. 
We ask for rest today, and quietness unshaken by the 
world's appearances. 
We ask for peace and stillness in the midst of 
all the turmoil born of clashing dreams. 
We ask for safety and for 
happiness, although we seem to look on danger and on sorrow. 


And we have the thought that will answer our asking with what we 
request. 


w 109 L 2. 
"I rest in God." This thought will bring to you the rest 
and quiet, peace and stillness, and the safety and the happiness you 
seek. 
"I rest in God." This thought has power to wake the sleeping 
truth in you, whose vision sees beyond appearances to that same 
truth in everyone and everything there is. 
Here is the end of suffer¬ 
ing for all the world, and everyone who ever came and yet will 
come to linger for a while. 
Here is the thought in which the Son of 
God is born again, to recognize Himself. 
331 

W 109 L 3. 
"I rest in God." Completely undismayed this thought will 
carry you through storms and strife, past misery and pain, past loss 
and death, and onward to the certainty of God. 
There is no suffer¬ 
ing it cannot heal. 
There is no problem which 332 it cannot solve. 


And no appearance but will turn to truth before the eyes of you who 
rest in God. 


w 109 L 4. 
This is the day of peace. 
You rest in God, and while the 
world is torn by winds of hate, your rest remains completely undis¬ 
turbed. 
Yours is the rest of truth. 
Appearances cannot intrude on 
you. 
You call to all to join you in your rest, and they will hear and 
come to you because you rest in God. 
They will not hear another 
voice but yours, because you gave your voice to God and now you 
rest in Him, and let Him speak through you. 


W 109 L 5. 
In Him you have no cares and no concerns, no burdens, no 
anxiety, no pain, no fear of future and no past regrets. 
In timeless- 


331 John 3:3 Jesus answered and said to him, "Most assuredly, I say to you, unless one is bom again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God.” 

John 3:7 Do not marvel that I said to you, “You must be bom again.” 

332 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



1221 

PROOF COPY 



Part 1 


ness you rest, while time goes by without its touch upon you, for 
your rest can never change in any way at all. 
W(223) You rest today. 

And as you close your eyes, sink into stillness. 
Let these periods of 
rest and respite reassure your mind that all its frantic fantasies were 
but the dreams of fever that has passed away. 
Let it be still and 
thankfully accept its healing. 
No more fearful dreams will come 
now that you rest in God. 
Take time today to slip away from 
dreams and into peace. 


w 109 L 6. 
Each hour that you take your rest today a tired mind is 
suddenly made glad, a bird with broken wings begins to sing, a 
stream long dry begins to flow again. 
The world is born again each 
time you rest, and hourly remember that you came to bring the 
peace of God into the world, that it might take its rest along with 
you. 


W 109 L 7. 
With each five minutes that you rest today the world is 
nearer waking. 
And the time when rest will be the only thing there 
is comes closer to all worn and tired minds, too weary now to go 
their way alone. 
And they will hear the bird begin to sing, and see 
the stream begin to flow again, with hope reborn and energy re¬ 
stored to walk with lightened steps along the road that suddenly 
seems easy as they go. 


w 109 L 8. 
You rest within the peace of God today, and call upon 
your brothers from your rest, to draw them to their rest along with 
you. 
You will be faithful to your trust today, forgetting no-one, 
bringing everyone into the boundless circle of your peace, the holy 
sanctuary where you rest. 
Open the temple doors and let them 
come from far across the world and near as well; your distant broth¬ 
ers and your closest friends; bid them all enter here and rest with 
you. 


W 109 L 9. 
You rest within the peace of God today, quiet and un¬ 
afraid. 
Each brother comes to take his rest, and offer it to you. 


W(224) We rest together here, for thus our rest is made complete, and 
what we give today we have received already. 
Time is not the 
guardian of what we give today. 
We give to those unborn and those 


11-218 


1222 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


passed by, to every Thought of God, and to the Mind in Which these 
Thoughts were born, and where they rest. 
And we remind them of 
their resting place each time we tell ourselves: 

"Irest in God.” W(225) 


PROOF 


1223 


COPY 


11-219 


Part 1 


Lesson 110 "I am as God created me." 

w no L l. 
We will repeat today's idea from time to time. 
For this one 
thought would be enough to save you and the world, if you be¬ 
lieved that it is true. 
Its truth would mean that you have made no 
changes in yourself which have reality, nor changed the universe so 
that what God created was replaced by fear and evil, misery and 
death. 
If you remain as God created you, fear has no meaning, evil 
is not real, and misery and death do not exist. 


w no L 2. 
Today's idea is therefore all you need to let complete cor¬ 
rection heal your mind and give you perfect vision, which will heal 
all the mistakes that any mind has made at any time or place. 
It is 
enough to heal the past and make the future free. 
It is enough to let 
the present be accepted as it is. 
It is enough to let time be the means 
for all the world to learn escape from time, and every change which 
time appears to bring in passing by. 


w no L 3. 
If you remain as God created you appearances cannot re¬ 
place the truth, health cannot turn to sickness, nor can death be sub¬ 
stitute for life, or fear for love. 
All this has not occurred, if you re¬ 
main as God created you. 
You need no thought but just this one, to 
let redemption come to light the world and free it from the past. 


w no L 4. 
In this one thought is all the past undone; the present 
saved to quietly extend into a timeless future. 
If you are as God cre¬ 
ated you, then there has been no separation of your mind from His, 
no split between your mind and other minds, and only unity within 
your own. 


w no L 5. 
The healing power of today's idea is limitless. 
It is the 
birthplace of all miracles, the great restorer of the truth to the 
awareness of the world. 
Practice today's idea with gratitude. 
This is 
the truth that comes to set you free. 
333 This is the truth that God has 
promised you. 
This is the Word in which all sorrow ends. 
W(226) 


John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 


11-220 


1224 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


W 110 L 6. 
For your five minute practice periods, begin with this quo¬ 
tation from the text: 

"I am as God created me. 
His Son 

can suffer nothing. 
And I am His Son." 

Then, with this statement firmly in your mind, try to discover in 
your mind this 334 Self Who is the holy Son of God Himself. 
Seek 
Him within you Who is Christ in you, the Son of God and Brother to 
the world; the Savior Who has been forever saved, with power to 
save whoever touches Him however lightly, asking for the Word 
which tells him he is brother unto Him. 


w no L 7. 
You are as God created you. 
Today honor your Self. 
Let 
graven images you made to be the Son of God instead of what he is 
be worshipped not today. 
335 Deep in your mind the holy Christ in 
you is waiting your acknowledgment as you. 
And you are lost and 
do not know yourself while He is unacknowledged and unknown. 


w no L 8. 
Seek Him today, and find Him. 
He will be your Savior 
from all idols you have made. 
For when you find Him you will un¬ 
derstand how worthless are your idols, and how false the images 
which you believed were you. 
Today we make a great advance to 
truth by letting idols go, and opening our hands and hearts and 
minds to God today. 


W 110 L 9. 
We will remember Him throughout the day with thankful 
hearts, and loving thoughts for all who meet with us today, for it is 
thus that we remember Him. 
And we will say, that we may be re¬ 
minded of His Son, our holy Self, the Christ in each of us, 

"I am as God created me." 

Let us declare this truth as often as we can. 
This is the Word of God 
that sets you free. 
336 This is the key that opens up the gate of 


334 Handwritten mark-up suggests (The). 


335 Exodus 20:4 You shall not make for yourself a carved image—any likeness of anything that is in 
heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth; 

336 John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 

John 1:1-5 In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 
The 
same was in the beginning with God. 
All things were made by him; and without him was not anything 


1225 


11-221 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Heaven, and which lets you enter in the peace of God and His eter¬ 
nity. 
W(227) 337 W(228) 

Review 3 (W 110 R3) 

Introduction 

w no R3 l. 
Our third 338 review begins today. 
We will review two of 
the last twenty ideas each day until we have reviewed them all. 
339 
We will observe the 340 special format for these practice periods, 
which you are urged to follow 341 as closely as you can. 
We under¬ 
stand, of course, that it may be impossible for you to undertake 
what is suggested here as optimal each day and every hour of the 
day. 


W 110 R3 2. 
Learning will not be hampered when you miss a practice 
period because it is impossible at the appointed time. 
Nor is it nec¬ 
essary that you make excessive efforts to be sure that you catch up 
in terms of numbers. 
Rituals are not our aim, and would defeat our 
learning goal. 
But learning will be hampered when you skip a prac¬ 
tice period because you are unwilling to devote the time to it which 
you are asked to give. 
Do not deceive yourself in this. 
Unwilling¬ 
ness can be most carefully concealed behind a cloak of situations 
you can not control. 


W 110 R3 3. 
Learn to distinguish situations which are poorly suited to 
your practicing from those which you establish to uphold a camou¬ 
flage for your unwillingness. 
Those practice periods which you 
have lost because you did not want to do them for whatever reason 


made that hath been made. 
In him was life; and the life was the light of men. 
And the light shineth in 
the darkness; and the darkness apprehended it not. 


337 The original manuscript page 227 is not present in our copy. 
It would appear that there never was a 
page 227 in the Workbook manuscript. 
No page 227 is present in any copy consulted. 
Between the end 
of Lesson 110 on page 226 of this manuscript and the beginning of REVIEW 3 on page 228 of this 
manuscript there is no additional material in any known version of ACIM, including the Notes. 
It is 
likely therefore that the Scribes simply missed a page number rather than inadvertently leaving out any 
material. 
We note additionally that on the top of page 226, “227” is handwritten in, indicating the edi¬ 
tors were aware of a missing page. 


338 Handwritten mark-up suggests (next). 


339 Handwritten mark-up suggests (two recent lessons every day for ten successive days of practicing.) 

340 Handwritten mark-up suggests (a). 


341 Handwritten mark-up suggests (just). 



11-222 


1226 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


should be done as soon as you have changed your mind about your 
goal. 


W 110 R3 4. 
You are unwilling to cooperate in practicing salvation 
only if it interferes with gods you hold more dear. 
When you with¬ 
draw the value given them, allow your practice periods to be re¬ 
placements for your litanies to them. 
They gave you nothing. 
But 
your practice periods 342 offer you everything. 
343 Accept their offer¬ 
ing and be at peace. 
344 

w no R3 5. 
The format you should use for these reviews is this: De¬ 
vote five minutes twice a day, or longer if you would prefer, to con¬ 
templating the ideas assigned. 
Read over the ideas and comments 
which are written first in each day's exercises. 
345 Then begin to think 
about them quietly, letting your mind W(229) relate them to your 
needs, your seeming problems and all your concerns. 


W 110 R3 6. 
Place the ideas within your mind, and let it use them as it 
chooses. 
Give it faith that it will use them wisely, being helped in its 
decisions by the One Who gave the thoughts to you. 
What can you 
trust but what is in your mind? Have faith, in these reviews, the 
means the Holy Spirit uses will not fail. 
The wisdom of your mind 
will come to your assistance. 
Give it direction at the start, and then 
lean back in quiet faith, and let it use the ideas you have given it as 
they were given you. 
346 

W 110 R3 7. 
You have been given them in perfect trust; in perfect con¬ 
fidence that you would use them well; in perfect faith that you 


' l;: Handwritten mark-up suggests (practicing can). 


343 Handwritten mark-up suggests (everything to you). 


’ 44 This sentence is re-written by hand as (And so accept its offering, and be at peace.) In the Notes it is 
the same as shown here. 


343 This paragraph is extensively marked up to read as follows: (The format you should use for these 
reviews is this: Devote five minutes twice a day, or longer if you would prefer it, to considering the 
thoughts that are assigned. 
Read over the ideas and comments that are written down for each day's 
exercise. 
And then begin to think about them, while letting your mind relate them to your needs, your 
seeming problems and all your concerns.) FIP has it in that re-written form. 
In the Notes it reads as 
shown. 


346 This sentence is extensively re-written as follows: (Give directions at the outset; then lean back in 
quiet faith, and let the mind employ the thoughts you gave as they were given you for it to use.) In the 
Notes it is the same as shown. 



1227 


11-223 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


would understand 347 their messages, and use them for yourself. 
Of¬ 
fer them to your mind in that same trust and confidence and faith. 


It will not fail. 
It is the Holy Spirit's chosen means for your salva¬ 
tion. 
And with His trust it merits yours as well. 
348 

w no R3 8. 
We emphasize the benefits to you, if you devote the first 
five minutes of the day to your review, 349 and also give the last five 
minutes of your waking day to it. 
350 If this cannot be done, at least 
try to divide them so you undertake one in the morning, and the 
other in the hour just before you go to sleep. 


w no R3 9. 
The exercises to be done throughout the day are equally 
important, and perhaps of even greater value. 
You have been in¬ 
clined to do the exercises and then go on to other things, without 
applying what you learned to them. 
As a result, your learning has 
had little reinforcement, and you have not given it the opportunity 
to prove its worth to you. 
351 

w no R3 10. 
Here is another chance to use it well. 
In these reviews 
we stress the need to let your learning not lie idly by between your 
longer practice periods. 
Attempt to give your daily two ideas a brief 
but serious review each hour. 
Use one on the hour, and the other 
one a half an hour later. 
You need not give more than just a mo¬ 
ment to each one. 
W(230) Repeat it, and allow your mind to rest a 
little time in silence and in peace. 


W 110 R3 11. 
Then turn to other things, but try to keep the thought 
with you, and let it serve to help you keep your peace throughout 
the day. 
352 If you are shaken, think of it again. 
These practice peri¬ 
ods are planned to help you form the habit of applying what you 


,47 Handwritten mark-up suggests (see). 


,4S This sentence is re-written as follows: (Since it has His trust, it surely merits having yours as well.) 

' 14 Handwritten mark-up suggests (s). 


350 Handwritten mark-up suggests (them). 


351 This paragraph is extensively rewritten: (The exercises to be done throughout the day are equally 
important, and perhaps of even greater value. 
You have been inclined to practice only at appointed 
times, and then go on your way to other things, without applying what you learned to them. 
As a result, 
you have gained little reinforcement, and have not given your learning a fair chance to prove how great 
are its potential gifts to you.) In the Notes it is as shown above. 
FIP has it as re-written. 


352 Handwritten mark-up suggests (as well). 



11-224 


1228 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


learn each day to everything you do. 
Do not repeat it 353 and then lay 
it down. 
Its usefulness is limitless to you. 
And it is meant to serve 
you in all ways, all times and places, and whenever you need help 
of any kind. 
Try, then, to take it with you in the business of the day, 
and make it holy, worthy of God's Son, acceptable to God and to 
your Self. 


w no R3 12. 
Each day's review assignment will conclude with a re¬ 
statement of the thought to use each hour, and the one to be applied 
on each half hour as well. 
Forget them not. 
This second chance 
with each of these ideas will bring such large advances that we 
come from these reviews with learning gains so great that we begin 
again 354 on 355 solid ground. 
Do not forget how little you have 
learned. 
Do not forget how much you can learn now. 
Do not forget 
your Father's need of you, as you review these thoughts He gave to 
you. 
W(231) 


353 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the thought). 


354 Handwritten mark-up suggests(we will continue). 

353 Handwritten mark-up suggests (more). 



1229 


11-225 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 111 For morning and evening review: (91-92) 

W111L1. 
91) “Miracles are seen in light. 
” 

I cannot see in darkness. 
Let the light 
Of holiness and truth light up my mind, 

And let me see the innocence within. 


W 111 L 2. 
92) “Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength are one.” 

I see through strength, the gift of God to me. 


My weakness is the dark His gift dispels 
By giving me His strength to take its place. 


W 111 L 3. 
On the hour: 

"Miracles are seen in light." 

W 111 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength are one." W(232) 


11-226 


1230 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 112 For morning and evening review: (93-94) 

W 112 L 1. 
93) “Light and joy and peace abide in me. 
” 

I am the home of light and joy and peace. 


I welcome them into the home I share 
With God, because I am a part of Him. 


W 112 L 2. 
94) “I am as God created me. 
” 

I will remain forever as I was 
Created by the Changeless like Himself. 


And I am one with Him, and He with me. 

w 112 L 3. 
On the Hour: 

"Light and joy and peace abide in me." 

W 112 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"I am as God created me." W(233) 


1231 


11-227 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 113 For morning and evening review: (95-96) 

W 113 L 1. 
95) “I am One Self, united with my Creator. 
” 

Serenity and perfect peace are mine 
Because I am One Self completely whole, 

At one with all creation and with God. 


W 113 L 2. 
96) “Salvation comes from my One Self.” 

From my One Self Whose knowledge still remains 
Within my mind, I see God’s perfect plan 
For my salvation perfectly fulfilled. 


W113L3. 
On the hour: 

"I am One Self, united with my Creator." 

W 113 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"Salvation comes from my One Self" W(234) 


11-228 


1232 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 114 For morning and evening review: (97-98) 

W 114 L 1. 
97) “lam Spirit.” 

I am the Son of God. 
No body can 
Contain my Spirit, nor impose on me 
A limitation God created not. 


W 114 L 2. 
98) “I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation. 
” 

What can my function be but to accept 
The Word of God, Who has created me, 

For what I am and will forever be? 

W 114 L 3. 
On the hour: 

"I am Spirit." 

W 114 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"I will accept my part in God’s plan for salvation.” W(235) 


1233 


11-229 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 115 For morning and evening review: (99-100) 

W 115 L 1. 
99) “Salvation is my only function here. 
” 

My function here is to forgive the world 
For all the errors I have made. 
For thus 
Am I released from them with all the world. 


W 115 L 2. 
100) “My part is essential to God's plan for salvation. 
” 

I am essential to the plan of God 

For the salvation of the world. 
For He 

Gave me His plan that I might save the world. 


W 115 L 3. 
On the hour: 

"Salvation is my only function here." 

W 115 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"My part is essential to God's plan for salvation." W(236) 


11-230 


1234 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 116 For morning and evening review: (101-102) 

W 116 L 1. 
101) “God’s Will for me is perfect happiness. 
” 

God's Will is perfect happiness for me. 


And I can suffer hut from the belief 
There is another will apart from His. 


W 116 L 2. 
102) “I share God's Will for happiness for me. 
” 

I share my Father’s Will for me, His Son. 


What He has given me is all I want. 


What He has given me is all there is. 


W 116 L 3. 
On the hour: 

"God’s Will for me is perfect happiness." 

W 116 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"I share God’s Will for happiness for me." W(237) 


1235 


11-231 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 117 For morning and evening review: (103-104) 

W 117 L 1. 
103) “God, being Love, is also happiness.” 

Let me remember love is happiness 

And nothing else brings joy. 
And so I choose 

To entertain no substitutes for love. 


W 117 L 2. 
104) “I seek but what belongs to me in truth. 
” 

Love is my heritage, and with it joy. 


These are the gifts my Father gave to me. 


I woidd accept all that is mine in truth. 


W 117 L 3. 
On the hour: 

"God, being Love, is also happiness." 

W 117 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"I seek but what belongs to me in truth." W(238) 


11-232 


1236 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 118 For morning and evening review: (105-106) 

W 118 L 1. 
105) “God’s peace and joy are mine” 

Today I will accept God’s peace and joy 
In glad exchange for all the substitutes 
Which I have made for happiness and peace. 


W 118 L 2. 
106) “Let me be still and listen to the truth. 
” 

Let my own feeble voice be still, and let 
Me hear the mighty Voice of truth itself 
Assure me that I am God's perfect Son. 


W 118 L 3. 
On the hour: 

" God’s peace and joy are mine." 

W 118 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"Let me be still and listen to the truth." W(239) 


1237 


11-233 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 119 For morning and evening review: (107-108) 

W 119 L 1. 
107) “Truth will correct all errors in my mind. 
” 

I am mistaken when I think I can 
Be hurt in any way. 
I am God's Son, 

Whose Self rests safely in the Mind of God. 


W 119 L 2. 
108) “To give and to receive are one in truth. 
” 

I will forgive all things today, that I 
May learn how to accept the truth in me, 

And come to recognize my sinlessness. 


W 119 L 3. 
On the hour: 

"Truth will correct all errors in my mind ." 

W 119 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"To give and to receive are one in truth." W(240) 


11-234 


1238 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 120 For morning and evening review: (109-110) 

W 120 L 1. 
109) “I rest in God. 
” 

I rest in God today, and let Him work 
In me and through me, while I rest in Him 
In quiet and in perfect certainty. 


W 120 L 2. 
110) “I am as God created me. 
” 

I am God's Son. 
Today I lay aside 
All sick illusions of myself, and let 
My Father tell me Who I really am. 


W120L3. 
On the hour: 

"I rest in God." 

W 120 L 4. 
On the half hour: 

"I am as God created me." W(24i) 


1239 


11-235 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 121 "Forgiveness is the key to happiness." 

w 121L l. 
Here is the answer to your search for peace. 
Here is the 
key to meaning in a world which seems to make no sense. 
Here is 
the way to safety in apparent dangers which appear to threaten you 
at every turn, and bring uncertainty to all your hopes of ever finding 
quietness and peace. 
Here are all questions answered; here the end 
of all uncertainty ensured at last. 


W 121 L 2. 
The unforgiving mind is full of fear, and offers love no 
room to be itself; no place where it can spread its wings in peace, 
and soar above the turmoil of the world. 
The unforgiving mind is 
sad, without the hope of respite and release from pain. 
It suffers 
and abides in misery, peering about in darkness, seeing not, yet cer¬ 
tain of the danger lurking there. 


W 121 L 3. 
The unforgiving mind is torn with doubt, confused about 
itself and all it sees, afraid and angry, weak and blustering, afraid to 
go ahead, afraid to stay, afraid to waken or to go to sleep, afraid of 
every sound, yet more afraid of stillness; terrified of darkness, yet 
more terrified at the approach of light. 
What can the unforgiving 
mind perceive but its damnation? What can it behold except the 
proof that all its sins are real? 

W 121 L 4. 
Tire unforgiving mind sees no mistakes, but only sins. 
It 
looks upon the world with sightless eyes, and shrieks as it beholds 
its own projections rising to attack its miserable parody of life. 
It 
wants to live, yet wishes it were dead. 
It wants forgiveness, yet it 
sees no hope. 
It wants escape, yet can conceive of none because it 
sees the sinful everywhere. 
W(242) 

W 121 L 5. 
Tire unforgiving mind is in despair, without the prospect 
of a future which can offer anything but more despair. 
Yet it re¬ 
gards its judgment of the world as irreversible, and does not see it 
has condemned itself to this despair. 
It thinks it cannot change, for 
what it sees bears witness that its judgment is correct . 
356 It does not 


356 John 1:7-8 This man came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all through him might 
believe. 
He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. 



11-236 


1240 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


ask because it thinks it knows. 
It does not question, certain it is 
right. 


W 121 L 6. 
Forgiveness is acquired. 
It is not inherent in a 357 mind 
which cannot sin. 
As sin was an idea you taught yourself, forgive¬ 
ness must be learned by you as well, but from a Teacher other than 
yourself, who represents the other Self in you. 
Through Him you 
learn how to forgive the self you think you made, and let it disap¬ 
pear. 
Thus you return your mind as one to Him Who is your Self, 
and Who can never sin. 


W 121 L 7. 
Each unforgiving mind presents you with an opportunity 
to teach your own how to forgive itself. 
Each one awaits release 
from hell through you, and turns to you imploringly for Heaven 
here and now. 
It has no hope, but you become its hope. 
And as its 
hope do you become your own. 
The unforgiving mind must learn 
through your forgiveness that it has been saved from hell. 
And as 
you teach salvation, you will learn. 
Yet all your teaching and your 
learning will be not of you, but of the Teacher Who was given you 
to show the way to you. 


w 121L 8. 
Today we practice learning to forgive. 
If you are willing, 
you can learn today to take the key to happiness, and use it on your 
own behalf. 
We will devote ten minutes in the morning, and at 
night another ten, to learning how to give forgiveness and receive 
forgiveness too. 
W(243) 

W 121 L 9. 
The unforgiving mind does not believe that giving and 
receiving are the same. 
Yet we will try to learn today that they are 
one through practicing forgiving toward one whom you think of as 
an enemy and one whom you consider as a friend. 
And as you 
learn to see them both as one, we will extend the lesson to our¬ 
selves, 358 and see that their escape included ours. 
359 


John 18:37 Pilate therefore said to Him, “Are You a king then?” 

Jesus answered, “You say rightly that I am a king. 
For this cause I was bom, and for this cause I have 
come into the world, that I should bear witness to the tmth. 
Everyone who is of the tmth hears My 
voice.” 

357 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 


358 Handwritten mark-up suggests(yourself). 



1241 


11-237 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 121 L 10. 
Begin the longer practice periods by thinking of someone 
you do not like, who seems to irritate you, or to cause regret in you 
if you should meet him; one you actively despise, or merely try to 
overlook. 
It does not matter what the form your anger takes. 
You 
probably have chosen him already. 
He will do. 

w 121L 11 . 
Now close your eyes and see him in your mind, and look 
at him a while. 
Try to perceive some light in him somewhere; a little 
gleam which you had never noticed. 
Try to find some little spark of 
brightness shining through the ugly picture which you hold of him. 

Look at this picture until 360 you see a light somewhere within it, and 
then try to let this light extend until it covers him, and makes the 
picture beautiful and good. 


W 121 L 12. 
Look at this changed perception for a while, and turn 
your mind to one you call a friend. 
Try to transfer the light you 
learned to see around your former "enemy" to him. 
Perceive him 
now as more than friend to you, for in that light his holiness shows 
you your Savior, saved and saving, healed and whole. 


W 121 L 13. 
Then let him offer you the light you see in him, and let 
your "enemy" and Friend unite in blessing you with what you gave. 

Now are you one with them, and they with you. 
Now have you 
been forgiven by yourself. 
Do not forget, throughout the day, the 
role forgiveness plays in bringing happiness to every unforgiving 
mind, with yours among them. 


W 121 L 14. 
Every hour tell yourself: 

"Forgiveness is the key to happiness. 


I will awaken from the dream that I 

Am mortal, fallible, andfidl of sin, 

And know I am the perfect Son of God." W(244) 


359 Handwritten mark-up suggests (yours). 


360 Handwritten mark-up suggests (till) or in the spelling conventions used in this edition, (‘til). 



11-238 


1242 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 122 "Forgiveness offers everything I want." 

w 122 L l. 
What could you want forgiveness cannot give? Do you 
want peace? Forgiveness offers it. 
Do you want happiness, a quiet 
mind, a certainty of purpose, and a sense of worth and beauty that 
transcends the world? Do you want care and safety, and the 
warmth of sure protection always? Do you want a quietness that 
cannot be disturbed, a gentleness that never can be hurt, a deep, 
abiding comfort, and a rest so perfect it can never be upset? 
w 122 L 2. 
All this forgiveness offers you, and more. 
It sparkles in 
your eyes as you awake, and gives you joy with which to meet the 
day. 
It soothes your forehead while you sleep, and rests upon your 
eyelids so you see no dreams of fear and evil, malice and attack. 

And when you wake again, it offers you another day of happiness 
and peace. 
All this forgiveness offers you, and more, 
w 122 L 3. 
Forgiveness lets the veil be lifted up which hides the Face 
of Christ from those who look with unforgiving eyes upon the 
world. 
It lets you recognize the Son of God, and clears your mem¬ 
ory of all dead thoughts so that remembrance of your Father can 
arise across the threshold of your mind. 
What would you want for¬ 
giveness cannot give? What gifts but these are worthy to be 
sought? What fancied value, trivial effect, or transient promise 
never to be kept, can hold more hope than what forgiveness brings? 

W 122 L 4. 
Why would you seek an answer other than the answer 
that will answer everything? Here is the perfect answer, given to 
imperfect questions, meaningless requests, half-hearted willingness 
to hear, and less than halfway diligence and partial trust. 
Here is 
the answer! Seek for it no more. 
You will not find another one in¬ 
stead. 


W 122 L 5. 
God's plan for your salvation cannot change, nor can it 
fail. 
Be thankful it remains exactly as He planned it. 
Changelessly 
it stands before you, like an open door with warmth and welcome 
calling from beyond the doorway, bidding you to enter in, and 
make yourself at home where you belong. 
W(245) 


1243 


11-239 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


w 122 L 6. 
Here is the answer! Would you stand outside while all of 
Heaven waits for you within? Forgive and be forgiven. 
As you give 
you will receive. 
There is no plan but this for the salvation of the 
Son of God. 
Let us today rejoice that this is so, for here we have an 
answer, clear and plain, beyond deceit in its simplicity, 
w 122 L 7. 
All of the complexities the world has spun of fragile cob¬ 
webs disappear before the power and the majesty of this extremely 
simple statement of the truth. 
Here is the answer! Do not turn 
away in aimless wandering again. 
Accept salvation now. 
It is the 
gift of God and not the world. 
The world can give no gifts of any 
value to a mind which has received what God has given as its own. 

w 122 L 8. 
God wills salvation be received today, and that the intrica¬ 
cies of your dreams no longer hide their nothingness from you. 


Open your eyes today, and look upon a happy world of safety and 
of peace. 
Forgiveness is the means by which it comes to take the 
place of hell. 
In quietness it rises up to greet your open eyes, and 
fill your heart with deep tranquility as ancient truths, forever newly 
born, arise in your awareness. 
What you will remember then can 
never be described. 
Yet your forgiveness offers it to you. 

w 122 L 9. 
Remembering the gifts forgiveness gives, we undertake 
our practicing today with hope and faith that this will be the day 
salvation will be ours. 
Earnestly and gladly will we seek for it to¬ 
day, aware we hold the key within our hands, accepting Heaven's 
answer to the hell we made, but where we would remain no more. 


W 122 L 10. 
Morning and evening do we gladly give a quarter of an 
hour to the search in which the end of hell is guaranteed. 
Begin in 
hopefulness, for we have reached the turning point at which the 
road becomes far easier. 
And now the way is short that yet we 
travel. 
We are close indeed to the appointed ending of the dream. 



W(246) 


w 122 L 11 . 
Sink into happiness as you begin these practice periods, 
for they hold out the sure rewards of questions answered, and what 
your acceptance of the answer brings. 
Today it will be given you to 


11-240 


1244 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


feel the peace forgiveness offers, and the joy the lifting of the veil 
holds out to you. 


W 122 L 12. 
Before the light you will receive today the world will fade 
until it disappears, and you will see another world arise you have 
no words to picture. 
Now we walk directly into light, and we re¬ 
ceive the gifts which have been held in store for us since time began, 
kept waiting for today. 


W 122 L 13. 
Forgiveness offers everything you want. 
Today all things 
you want are given you. 
Let not your gifts recede throughout the 
day, as you return again to meet a world of shifting change and 
bleak appearances. 
Retain your gifts in clear awareness as you see 
the changeless in the heart of change; the light of truth behind ap¬ 
pearances. 


w 122 L 14. 
Be tempted not to let your gifts slip by, and drift into for¬ 
getfulness but hold them firmly in your mind by your attempts to 
think of them at least a minute as each quarter of an hour passes by. 

W(247) Remind yourself how precious are these gifts with this re¬ 
minder, which has power to hold your gifts in your awareness 
through the day: 

"Forgiveness offers everything I want. 


Today I have accepted this as true. 


Today I have received the gifts of God." W(248) 


1245 


11-241 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 123 "I thank my Father for His gifts to me." 

w 123 L l. 
Today let us be thankful. 
We have come to gentler path¬ 
ways and to smoother roads. 
There is no thought of turning back, 
and no implacable resistance to the truth. 
A bit of wavering re¬ 
mains, some small objections and a little hesitance, but we 361 can 
well be grateful for our 362 gains, which are far greater than we 363 real¬ 
ize. 
A day devoted now to gratitude will add the benefit of some 
insight into the real extent of all the gains which you have made; the 
gifts you have received. 


W 123 L 2. 
Be glad today in loving thankfulness your Father has not 
left you to yourself, nor let you wander in the dark alone. 
Be grate¬ 
ful He has saved you from the self you thought you made to take 
the place of Him and His creation. 
Give Him thanks today. 
Give 
thanks that He has not abandoned you, and that His Love forever 
will remain shining on you, forever without change, 
w 123 L 3. 
Give thanks as well that you are changeless, for the Son 
He loves is changeless as Himself. 
Be grateful you are saved. 
Be 
glad you have a function in salvation to fulfill. 
Be thankful that 
your value far transcends your meager gifts and petty judgments of 
the one whom God established as His Son. 


w 123 L 4. 
Today in gratitude we lift our hearts above despair, and 
raise our thankful eyes, no longer looking downward to the dust. 


We sing the song of thankfulness today in honor of the Self Which 
God has willed to be our true identity in Him. 
Today we smile on 
everyone we see, and walk with lightened footsteps as we go to do 
what is appointed us to do. 


w 123 L 5. 
We do not go alone. 
And we give thanks that in our soli¬ 
tude a Friend has come to speak the saving Word of God to us. 

W(249) And thanks to you for listening to Him. 
His Word is sound¬ 
less if it be not heard. 
In thanking Him the thanks are yours as well. 



361 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


362 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


363 Handwritten mark-up suggests(you). 



11-242 


1246 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


An unheard message will not save the world, however mighty be 
the Voice that speaks, however loving may the message be. 

w 123 L 6. 
Thanks be to you who heard, for you become the messen¬ 
gers who bring His Voice with you, and let it echo round and round 
the world. 
Receive the thanks of God today, as you give thanks to 
Him. 
For He would offer you the thanks you give, since He receives 
your gifts in loving gratitude, and gives them back a thousand and a 
hundred thousand more than they were given. 
He will bless your 
gifts by sharing them with you. 
And so they grow in power and in 
strength until they fill the world with gladness and with gratitude. 


W 123 L 7. 
Receive His thanks and offer yours to Him for fifteen 
minutes twice today. 
And you will realize to Whom you offer 
thanks, and Whom He thanks as you are thanking Him. 
This holy 
half an hour given Him will be returned to you in terms of years for 
every second; power to save the world eons more quickly for your 
thanks to Him. 


W 123 L 8. 
Receive His thanks, and you will understand how lovingly 
He holds you in His Mind, how deep and limitless His care for you, 
how perfect is His gratitude to you. 
Remember hourly to think of 
Him, and give Him thanks for everything He 364 gave His Son, that 

he might rise above the world remembering His Father and his Self. 

W(250) 


364 While the Urtext manuscript has “you” instead of “He”, both the Notes and FIP have “He” which 
does seem more likely to be correct. 



1247 


11-243 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 124 "Let me remember I am one with God." 

w 124 L l. 
Today we will again give thanks for our identity in God. 

Our home is safe, protection guaranteed in all we do, power and 
strength available to us in all our undertakings. 
We can fail in noth¬ 
ing. 
Everything we touch takes on a shining light which blesses and 
which heals. 
At one with God and with the universe, we go our 
way rejoicing, with the thought that God Himself goes everywhere 
with us. 


w 124 L 2. 
How holy are our minds! And everything we see reflects 
the holiness within the mind at one with God and with itself. 
How 
easily do errors disappear, and death give place to everlasting life. 

Our shining footprints point the way to truth, for God is our Com¬ 
panion as we walk the world a little while. 
And those who come to 
follow us will recognize the way because the light we carry stays 
behind, yet still remains with us as we walk on. 

w 124 L 3. 
What we receive is our eternal gift to those who follow 
after, and to those who went before or stayed with us a while. 
And 
God, Who loves us with the equal love in which we were created, 
smiles on us and offers us the happiness we gave, 
w 124 L 4. 
Today we will not doubt His Love for us, nor question His 
protection and His care. 
No meaningless anxieties can come be¬ 
tween our faith and our awareness of His Presence. 
We are one 
with Him today in recognition and remembrance. 
We feel Him in 
our hearts. 
Our minds contain His Thoughts, our eyes behold His 
loveliness in all we look upon. 
Today we see only the loving and 
the loveable. 


w 124 L 5. 
We see it in appearances of pain, and pain gives way to 
peace. 
We see it in the frantic, in the sad and the distressed, the 
lonely and afraid, who are restored to the tranquility and peace of 
mind in which they were created. 
And we see it in the dying and 
the dead as well, restoring them to life. 
W(25l) All this we see be¬ 
cause we saw it first within ourselves. 



11-244 


1248 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


w 124 L 6. 
No miracle can ever be denied to those who know that 
they are one with God. 
No thought of theirs but has the power to 
heal all forms of suffering in anyone in times gone by and times as 
yet to come as easily as in the ones who walk beside them now. 


Their thoughts are timeless, and apart from distance as apart from 
time. 


w 124 L 7. 
We join in this awareness as we say that we are one with 
God. 
For in these words we say as well that we are saved and 
healed; that we can save and heal accordingly. 
We have accepted 
and we now would give, for we would keep the gifts our Father 
gave. 
Today we would experience ourselves at one with Tlim, so 
that the world may share our recognition of reality. 
In our experi¬ 
ence the world is freed. 
As we deny our separation from our Father, 
it is healed along with us. 


w 124 L 8. 
Peace be to you today. 
Secure your peace by practicing 
awareness you are one with your Creator, as Fie is with you. 
Some¬ 
time today, whenever it seems best, devote a half an hour to the 
thought that you are one with God. 
This is our first attempt at an 
extended period for which we give no rules nor special words to 
guide your meditation. 
We will trust God's Voice to speak as Fie 
sees fit today, certain Fie will not fail. 
Abide with Him this half an 
hour. 
Fie will do the rest. 


w 124 L 9. 
Your benefit will not be less if you believe that nothing 
happened. 
You may not be ready to accept the gain today. 
Yet 
sometime, somewhere, it will come to you, nor will you fail to rec¬ 
ognize it when it dawns with certainty upon your mind. 
This half 
an hour will be framed in gold, with every minute like a diamond 
set around the mirror that this exercise will offer you. 
And you will 
see Christ's Face upon it, in reflection of your own. 
W(252) 

W 124 L 10. 
Perhaps today, perhaps tomorrow, you will see your own 
transfiguration in the glass this holy half an hour will hold out to 


1249 


11-245 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


you, to look upon yourself . 
365 When you are ready; you will find it 
there, within your mind and waiting to be found. 
You will remem¬ 
ber then the Thought to which you gave this half an hour, thank¬ 
fully aware no time was ever better spent. 
Perhaps today, perhaps 
tomorrow, you will look into this glass, and understand the sinless 
light you see belongs to you; the loveliness you look on is your own. 

W 124 L 11 . 
Count this half hour as your gift to God, in certainty that 
His return will be a sense of love you cannot understand, a joy too 
deep for you to comprehend, a sight too holy for the body's eyes to 
see, and yet you can be sure some day, perhaps today, perhaps to¬ 
morrow, you will understand and comprehend and see. 
Add fur¬ 
ther jewels to the golden frame that holds the mirror offered you 
today by hourly repeating to yourself: 

"Let me remember I am one with God, 

At one with all my brothers and my Self, 

In everlasting holiness and peace." W(253) 


,< ’ 5 Matthew 17:2 And He was transfigured before them. 
His face shone like the sun, and His clothes 
became as white as the light. 


1 Corinthians 13:12 For now we see in a mirror, dimly, but then face to face. 
Now I know in part, but 
then I shall know just as I also am known. 



11-246 


1250 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 125 "In quiet I receive God's Word today." 

W 125 L 1. 
Let this day be a day of stillness and of quiet listening. 

Your Father wills you hear His Word today. 
He calls to you from 
deep within your mind where He abides. 
Hear Him today. 
No 
peace is possible until His Word is heard around the world; until 
your mind, in quiet listening, accepts the message which the world 
must hear to usher in the quiet time of peace. 


W 125 L 2. 
This world will change through you. 
No other means can 
save it, for God's plan is simply this: The Son of God is free to save 
himself, given the Word of God to be his Guide, forever in his mind 
and at his side to lead him surely to his Father's house by his own 
will, forever free as God's. 
He is not led by force, but only love. 
He 
is not judged, but only sanctified. 


W 125 L 3. 
In stillness we will hear His 366 Voice today, without intru¬ 
sion of our petty thoughts, without our personal desires, and with¬ 
out all judgment of His holy Word. 
We will not judge ourselves to¬ 
day, for what we are can not be judged. 
We stand apart from all the 
judgments which the world has laid upon the Son of God. 
It knows 
him not. 
Today we will not listen to the world, but wait in silence 
for the Word of God. 


w 125 L 4. 
Hear, holy Son of God, your Father speak. 
His Voice 
would give to you His holy Word to spread across the world the 
tidings of salvation and the holy time of peace . 
367 We gather at the 
throne of God today, the quiet place within your 368 mind where He 
abides forever in the holiness which He created and will never 
leave. 


W 125 L 5. 
He has not waited until you return your mind to Him to 
give His Word to you. 
He has not hid Himself from you while you 


M Handwritten mark-up suggests (God's). 


367 Luke 1:19 And the angel answered and said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of 
God, and was sent to speak to you and bring you these glad tidings.” 

Luke 8:1 Now it came to pass, afterward, that He went through every city and village, preaching and 
bringing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God. 
And the twelve were with Him, 

368 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 



1251 

PROOF COPY 



Part 1 


have wandered off a little while from Him. 
He does not cherish the 
illusions which you hold about yourself. 
He knows His Son, and 
wills that he remain as part of Him regardless of his dreams; regard¬ 
less of his madness that his will is not his own. 
W(254) 

w 125 L 6. 
Today He speaks to you. 
His Voice awaits your silence, 
for His Word cannot be heard until your mind is quiet for a while, 
and meaningless desires have been stilled. 
Await His Word in 
quiet. 
There is peace within you to be called upon today to help 
make ready your most holy mind to hear the Voice of its Creator 
speak. 


w 125 L 7. 
Three times today, at times most suitable for silence, give 
ten minutes set apart from listening to the world, and choose in¬ 
stead a gentle listening to the Word of God. 
He speaks from nearer 
than your heart to you. 
His Voice is closer than your hand. 
His 
Love is everything you are and that He is; the same as you, and you 
the same as He. 


w 125 L 8. 
It is your voice to which you listen as He speaks to you. 
It 
is your Word He speaks. 
It is the Word of freedom and of peace, of 
unity of will and purpose, with no separation nor division in the 
single Mind of Father and of Son. 
In quiet listen to your Self today, 
and let Him tell you God has never left is Son, and you have never 
left your Self. 


w 125 L 9. 
Only be quiet. 
You will need no rule but this to let your 
practicing today lift you above the thinking of the world, and free 
your vision from the body's eyes. 
Only be still and listen. 
You will 
hear the Word in which the Will of God the Son joins in His Father's 
Will, at one with It, with no illusions interposed between the wholly 
indivisible and true. 
As every hour passes by today be still a mo¬ 
ment, and remind yourself you have a special purpose for this day; - 
in quiet to receive the Word of God . 
369 W(255) 


369 Psalm 46:10 Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth! 


11-248 


1252 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 126 "All that I give is given to myself." 

w 126 L l. 
Today's idea, completely alien to the ego and the thinking 
of the world, is crucial to the thought reversal which this course will 
bring about. 
If you believed this statement there would be no prob¬ 
lem in complete forgiveness, certainty of goal, and sure direction. 

You would understand the means by which salvation comes to you, 
and would not hesitate to use it now. 


w 126 L 2. 
Let us consider what you do believe in place of this idea. 


It seems to you that other people are apart from you, and able to be¬ 
have in ways which have no bearing on your thoughts, nor theirs on 
yours. 
Therefore your attitudes have no effect on them, and their 
appeals for help are not in any way related to your own. 
You fur¬ 
ther think that they can sin without affecting your perception of 
yourself, while you can judge their sin and yet remain apart from 
condemnation and at peace. 


w 126 L 3. 
When you "forgive" a sin, there is no gain to you directly. 

You give charity to one unworthy merely to point out that you are 
better, on a higher plane than he whom you forgive. 
He has not 
earned your charitable tolerance, which you bestow on one unwor¬ 
thy of the gift because his sins have lowered him beneath a true 
equality with you. 
He has no claim on your forgiveness. 
It holds 
out a gift to him but hardly to yourself. 


W 126 L 4. 
Thus is forgiveness basically unsound; a charitable whim, 
benevolent yet undeserved; a gift bestowed at times, at other times 
withheld. 
Unmerited, withholding it is just, nor is it fair that you 
should suffer when it is withheld. 
The sin which you forgive is not 
your own. 
Someone apart from you committed it and if you then 
are gracious unto him by giving him what he does not deserve, 
your 370 gift is no more yours than was his sin. 
W(256) 

W 126 L 5. 
If this be true, forgiveness has no grounds on which to rest 
dependably and sure. 
It is an eccentricity in which you sometimes 


370 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 



1253 


11-249 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


choose to give indulgently an undeserved reprieve. 
Yet it remains 
your right to let the sinner not escape the justified repayment for his 
sin. 
Think you the Lord of Heaven would allow the world's salva¬ 
tion to depend on this? Would not His care for you be small indeed 
if your salvation rested on a whim? 

w 126 L 6. 
You do not understand forgiveness. 
As you see it, it is but 
a check upon overt attack, without requiring correction in your 
mind. 
It cannot give you peace as you perceive it. 
It is not a means 
for your release from what you see in someone other than yourself. 


It has no power to restore your unity with him to your awareness. 
It 
is not what God intended it to be for you. 


w 126 L 7. 
Not having given Him the gift He asks of you, you cannot 
recognize His gifts, and think He has not given them to you. 
Yet 
would He ask you for a gift unless it was for you? Could He be sat¬ 
isfied with empty gestures, and evaluate such petty gifts as worthy 
of His Son? Salvation is a better gift than this, 371 and true forgive¬ 
ness, as the means by which it is attained, must heal the mind that 
gives, for giving is receiving. 
What remains as unreceived has not 
been given, but what has been given must have been received. 


W 126 L 8. 
Today we try to understand the truth that giver and re¬ 
ceiver are the same. 
You will need help to make this meaningful 
because it is so alien to the thoughts to which you are accustomed. 

But the Help you need is there. 
Give Him your faith today and ask 
Him that He share your practicing in truth today. 
And if you only 
catch a tiny glimpse of the release which lies in the idea we practice 
for today, this is a day of glory for the world. 
W(257) 

W 126 L 9. 
Give fifteen minutes twice today to the attempt to under¬ 
stand today's idea. 
It is the thought by which forgiveness takes its 
proper place in your priorities. 
It is the thought that will release 
your mind from every bar to what forgiveness means, and let you 
realize its worth to you. 



’ 7I Handwritten mark-up suggests a period and a new sentence. 



11-250 


1254 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 126 L 10. 
In silence close your eyes upon the world which does not 
understand forgiveness, and seek sanctuary in the quiet place where 
thoughts are changed and false beliefs laid by. 
Repeat today's idea, 
and ask for help in understanding what it really means. 
Be willing 
to be taught. 
Be glad to hear the Voice of truth and healing speak to 
you, and you will understand the words He speaks, and recognize 
He speaks your words to you. 


W 126 L 11. 
As often as you can, remind yourself you have a goal to¬ 
day; an aim which makes this day of special value to yourself and 
all your brothers. 
Do not let your mind forget this goal for long, but 
tell yourself: 

"All that I give is given to myself. 


The Help I need to learn that this is true 

Is with me now. 
And I will trust in Him." 

Then spend the 372 quiet moment, opening your mind to His correc¬ 
tion and His Love. 
And what you hear of Him you will believe, for 
what He gives will be received by you. 
W(258) 


372 Handwritten mark-up suggests (a). 



PROOF 


1255 


COPY 


11-251 



Part 1 


Lesson 127 "There is no love but God's." 

w 127 L l. 
Perhaps you think that different kinds of love are possible. 

Perhaps you think there is a kind of love for this, a kind for that; a 
way of loving one, another way of loving still another. 
Love is one. 

It has no separate parts and no degrees; no kinds nor levels, no di¬ 
vergences and no distinctions. 
It is like itself, unchanged through¬ 
out. 
It never alters with a person or a circumstance. 
It is the heart of 
God and also of His Son. 


W 127 L 2. 
Love's meaning is obscure to anyone who thinks that love 
can change. 
He does not see that changing love must be impossible. 

And thus he thinks that he can love at times and hate at other times. 

He also thinks that love can be bestowed on one and yet remain it¬ 
self although it is withheld from others. 
To believe these things of 
love is not to understand it. 
If it could make such distinctions it 
would have to judge between the righteous and the sinner, and per¬ 
ceive the Son of God in separate parts. 


w 127 L 3. 
Love cannot judge. 
As it is one itself, it looks on all as one. 

Its meaning lies in oneness. 
And it must elude the mind that thinks 
of it as partial or in part. 
There is no love but God's, and all of love 
is His. 
There is no 373 principle which rules where love is not. 
Love 
is a law without an opposite. 
Its wholeness is the power holding 
everything as one, the link between the Father and the Son which 
holds them both forever as the same. 


w 127 L 4. 
No course whose purpose is to teach you what you really 
are could fail to emphasize there is no difference in what you are 
and what love is. 
Love's meaning is your own, and shared by God 
Himself. 
For what you are is what He is. 
There is no love but His, 
and what He is is everything there is. 
There is no limit placed upon 
Himself, and so are you unlimited as well. 
W(259) 
w 127 L 5. 
No laws the world obeys can help you grasp love's mean¬ 
ing. 
What the world believes was made to hide love's meaning and 


373 Handwritten mark-up suggests (other). 



11-252 


1256 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


to keep it dark and secret. 
There is not one principle the world up¬ 
holds but violates the truth of what love is, and what you are as 
well. 
Seek not within the world to find your Self . 
374 Love is not 
found in darkness and in death. 
Yet it is perfectly apparent to the 
eyes that see and ears that hear its 375 Voice. 


w 127 L 6. 
Today we practice making free our 376 minds of all the laws 
you think you must obey; of all the limits under which you live, and 
all the changes which you think are part of human destiny. 
Today 
we take the largest single step this course requests in your advance 
toward its established goal. 
If you achieve the faintest glimmering 
of what love means today, you have advanced in distance without 
measure and in time beyond the count of years to your release, 
w 127 L 7. 
Let us together, then, be glad to give some time to God 
today, and understand there is no better use for time than this. 
For 
fifteen minutes twice today escape from every law in which you 
now believe. 
Open your mind and rest. 
The world which seems to 
hold you prisoner can be escaped by anyone who does not hold it 
dear. 
Withdraw all value you have placed upon its meagre offer¬ 
ings and senseless gifts, and let the Gift of God replace them all. 

w 127 L 8. 
Call to your Father, certain that Flis Voice will answer. 
Fie 
Flimself has promised this. 
And Fie Flimself will place a spark of 
truth within your mind wherever you give up a false belief, a dark 
illusion of your own reality and what love means. 
Fie will shine 
through your idle thoughts today, and help you understand the 
truth of love. 
In loving gentleness Fie will abide with you, as you 
allow His Voice to teach love's meaning to your clean and open 
mind . 
377 And He will bless the lesson with His Love. 
W(260) 

w 127 L 9. 
Today the legion of the future years of waiting for salva¬ 
tion disappears before the timelessness of what you learn. 
Let us 


374 John 5:44 "How can ye believe, who receive glory one of another, and the glory that cometh from 
the only God ye seek not?” 

375 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Love's). 


376 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


377 John 14:16 “And I will pray the Father, and He will give you another Helper, that He may abide 
with you forever.” 


1257 


11-253 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


give thanks today that we are spared a future like the past. 
Today 
we leave the past behind us, never more to be remembered. 
And 
we raise our eyes upon a different present, where a future shines 378 
unlike the past in every attribute. 


W 127 L 10. 
The world in infancy is newly born. 
And we will watch it 
grow in strength and health 379 to shed its blessing upon all who 
come to learn to cast aside the world they thought was made in hate 
to be love's enemy. 
Now are they all made free along with us. 
Now 
are they all our brothers in God's Love. 


w 127 L 11 . 
We will remember them throughout the day because we 
cannot leave a part of us outside our love, if we would know our 
Self. 
At least three times an hour think of one who makes the jour¬ 
ney with you, and who came to learn what you must learn. 
And as 
he comes to mind, give him this message from your Self: 

"I bless you, brother, with the Love of God 

Which I woidd share with you. 
For I would learn 

The joyous lesson that there is no love 

But God’s and yours and mine and everyone's." W(261) 


378 Handwritten mark-up suggests (dawns). 


319 Handwritten mark-up suggests (health and strength). 



11-254 


1258 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 128 "The world I see has nothing that I want." 

w 128 L l. 
The world you see has nothing that you need to offer you; 
nothing that you can use in any way, nor anything at all that serves 
to give you joy. 
Believe this thought, and you are saved from years 
of misery, from countless disappointments, and from hopes that 
turn to bitter ashes of despair. 
No-one but must accept this thought 
as true, if he would leave this world behind and soar beyond its 
petty scope and little ways. 


W 128 L 2. 
Each thing you value here is but a chain that binds you to 
the world, and it will serve no other end but this. 
For everything 
must serve the purpose you have given it until you see a different 
purpose there. 
The only purpose worthy of your mind this world 
contains is that you pass it by, without delaying to perceive some 
hope where there is none. 
Be you deceived no more. 
The world 
you see has nothing that you want. 


W 128 L 3. 
Escape today the chains you place upon your mind when 
you perceive salvation here. 
For what you value you make part of 
you, as you perceive yourself. 
All things you seek to make your 
value greater in your sight limit you further, hide your worth from 
you, and add another bar across the door that leads to true aware¬ 
ness of your Self. 


w 128 L 4. 
Let nothing which 380 relates to body thoughts delay your 
progress to salvation, nor permit temptation to believe the world 
has anything you want to hold you back. 
Nothing is here to cherish. 

Nothing here is worth one instant of delay and pain; one moment of 
uncertainty and doubt. 
The worthless offers nothing. 
Certainty of 
worth cannot be found in worthlessness. 


w 128 L 5. 
Today we practice letting go all thought of values we have 
given to the world. 
We leave it free of purposes we gave its aspects 
and its phases and its dreams. 
We hold it purposeless within our 
minds, and loosen it from all we wish it were. 
Thus do we lift the 


380 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



1259 


11-255 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


chains which bar the door to freedom from W(262) the world, and go 
beyond all little values and diminished goals, 
w 128 L 6. 
Peace and be still a little while, and see how far you rise 
above the world when you release your mind from chains, and let it 
seek the level where it finds itself at home. 
It will be grateful to be 
free a while. 
It knows where it belongs. 
But free its wings, and it 
will fly in sureness and in joy to join its holy purpose. 
Let it rest in 
its Creator, there to be restored to sanity, to freedom and to love. 


W 128 L 7. 
Give it ten minutes rest three times today. 
And when 
your eyes are opened afterwards, you will not value anything you 
see as much as when you looked at it before. 
Your whole perspec¬ 
tive on the world will shift by just a little every time you let your 
mind escape its chains. 
The world is not where it belongs. 
And you 
belong where it would be, and where it goes to rest when you re¬ 
lease it from the world. 
Your Guide is sure. 
Open your mind to 
Him. 
Be still and rest. 


W 128 L 8. 
Protect your mind throughout the day as well. 
And when 
you think you see some value in an aspect or an image of the world, 
refuse to lay this chain upon your mind, and tell yourself with quiet 
certainty: 

"This will not tempt me to delay myself. 


The world I see has nothing that I want." W(263) 


11-256 


1260 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 129 "Beyond this world there is a world I want." 

w 129 L l. 
This is the thought which follows from the one we prac¬ 
ticed yesterday. 
You cannot stop with the idea the world is worth¬ 
less, for unless you see that there is something else to hope for you 
will only be depressed. 
Our emphasis is not on giving up the world, 
but on exchanging it for what is far more satisfying, filled with joy, 
and capable of offering you peace. 
Think you this world can offer 
that to you? 

w 129 L 2. 
It might be worth a little time to think once more about the 
value of this world. 
Perhaps you will concede there is no loss in let¬ 
ting go all thought of value here. 
The world you see is merciless in¬ 
deed, unstable, cruel, unconcerned with you, quick to avenge and 
pitiless with hate. 
It gives but to rescind, and takes away all things 
that you have cherished for a while. 
No lasting love is found, for 
none is here. 
This is the world of time, where all things end. 


W 129 L 3. 
Is it a loss to find a world instead where losing is impossi¬ 
ble? Where love endures forever, hate cannot exist, and vengeance 
has no meaning? Is it loss to find all things you really want and 
know they have no ending, and they will remain exactly as you 
want them throughout time? Yet even they will be exchanged at 
last for what we cannot speak of, for you go from there to where 
words fail entirely, into a silence where the language is unspoken 
and yet surely understood. 


W 129 L 4. 
Communication, unambiguous and plain as day, remains 
unlimited for all eternity. 
And God Himself speaks to His Son as 
His Son speaks to Him. 
Their language has no words, for what they 
say cannot be symbolized. 
Their knowledge is direct and wholly 
shared and wholly one. 
W(264) 

w 129 L 5. 
How far away from this are you who stay bound to this 
world. 
And yet how near are you when you exchange it for the 
world you want. 
Now is the last step certain; now you stand an in¬ 
stant's space away from timelessness. 
Here can you but look for¬ 
ward, never back to see again the world you do not want. 
Here is 


1261 


11-257 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


the world that comes to take its place as you unbind your mind 
from little things the world sets forth to keep you prisoner there. 

Value them not, and they will disappear. 
Esteem them, and they 
will seem real to you. 


W 129 L 6. 
Such is the choice. 
What loss can be for you in choosing 
not to value nothingness? This world holds nothing that you really 
want, but what you choose instead you want indeed! Let it be given 
you today. 
It waits but for your choosing it to take the place of all 
the things you seek but do not want. 


W 129 L 7. 
Practice your willingness to make this change ten minutes 
in the morning and at night, and once more in between. 
Begin with 
this: 

"Beyond this world there is a world I want. 


I choose to see that world instead of this, 

For here is nothing that I really want." 

Then close your eyes upon the world you see, and in the silent 
darkness watch the lights that are not of this world light one by one 
until where one begins, another ends, loses all meaning as they 
blend in one. 


w 129 L 8. 
Today the lights of Heaven bend to you, to shine upon 
your eyelids as you rest beyond the world of darkness. 
Here is light 
your eyes cannot behold. 
And yet your mind can see it plainly, and 
can understand. 
A day of grace is given you today, and we give 
thanks. 


W 129 L 9. 
This day we realize that what you feared to lose was only 
loss. 
W(265) Now do we understand there is no loss. 
For we have 
seen its opposite at last, and we are grateful that the choice is made. 

Remember your decision hourly, and take a moment to confirm 
your choice by laying by whatever thoughts you have, and dwelling 
briefly only upon this: 

“The world I see has nothing that I want. 


Beyond this world there is a world I want." W(266) 


11-258 


1262 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 130 "It is impossible to see two worlds." 

w 130 L l. 
Perception is consistent. 
What you see reflects your think¬ 
ing. 
And your thinking but reflects your choice of what you want to 
see. 
Your values are determiners of this, for what you value you 
must want to see, believing what you see is really there. 
No-one can 
see a world his mind has not accorded value. 
And no-one can fail to 
look upon what he believes he wants. 


w 130 L 2. 
Yet who can really hate and love at once? Who can desire 
what he does not want to have reality? And who can choose to see a 
world of which he is afraid? Fear must make blind, for this its 
weapon is; that which you fear to see you cannot see. 
Love and per¬ 
ception thus go hand in hand, but fear obscures in darkness what is 
there. 


W 130 L 3. 
What, then, can fear project upon the world? What can be 
seen in darkness that is real? Truth is eclipsed by fear, and what 
remains is but imagined. 
Yet what can be real in blind imaginings 
of panic born? What would you want that this 381 is shown to you? 
What would you wish to keep in such a dream? 

W 130 L 4. 
Fear has made everything you think you see. 
All separa¬ 
tion, all distinctions, and the multitude of differences you believe 
make up the world. 
They are not there. 
Love's enemy has made 
them up. 
Yet love can have no enemy, and so they have no cause, 
no being and no consequence. 
They can be valued, but remain un¬ 
real. 
They can be sought, but they can not be found . 
382 Today we 
will not seek for them, nor waste this day in seeking not what can be 
found. 


w 130 L 5. 
It is impossible to see two worlds which have no overlap 
of any kind. 
Seek for the one; the other disappears. 
But one re¬ 
mains. 
They are the range of choice beyond which your decision 


" The Urtext manuscript has “thus” . 
This appears to be a typo, and FIP agrees it should be “this”. 
In 
the Notes it also appears to be “this.” 

382 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 


1263 


11-259 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


cannot go. 
The real and the unreal are all there is to choose be¬ 
tween, and nothing more than these. 
W(267) 

w 130 L 6. 
Today we will attempt no compromise where none is pos¬ 
sible. 
The world you see is proof you have already made a choice as 
all-embracing as its opposite. 
What we would learn today is more 
than just the lesson that you cannot see two worlds. 
It also teaches 
that the one you see is quite consistent from the point of view from 
which you see it. 
It is all a piece because it stems from one emotion, 
and reflects its source in everything you see. 


W 130 L 7. 
Six times today, in thanks and gratitude, we gladly give 
five minutes to the thought which ends all compromise and doubt, 
and go beyond it 383 all as one. 
We will not make a thousand mean¬ 
ingless distinctions, nor attempt to bring with us a little part of un¬ 
reality, as we devote our minds to finding only what is real. 


W 130 L 8. 
Begin your searching for the other world, by asking for a 
strength beyond your own, and recognize what it is you seek. 
You 
do not want illusions. 
And you come to these five minutes empty¬ 
ing your hands of all the petty treasures of this world. 
You wait for 
God to help you, as you say: 

“It is impossible to see two worlds. 


Let me accept the strength God offers me 
And see no value in this world, that I 
May find my freedom and deliverance. 
” 

w 130 L 9. 
God will be there. 
For you have called upon the great un¬ 
failing Power Who will take this giant step with you in gratitude. 

Nor will you fail to see His thanks expressed in tangible perception 
and in truth. 
You will not doubt what you will look upon. 
For 
though it is perception, it is not the kind of seeing that your eyes 
alone have ever seen before. 
And you will know God's strength up¬ 
held as you made this choice. 
W(268) 

w 130 L 10. 
Dismiss temptation easily today whenever it arises, 
merely by remembering the limits on your choice. 
The unreal or the 


" ; Handwritten mark-up suggests (them). 



11-260 


1264 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


real, the false or true is what you see, and only what you see. 
Per¬ 
ception is consistent with your choice, and hell or Heaven comes to 
you as one. 


w 130 L ll. 
Accept a little part of hell as real, and you have damned 
your eyes and cursed your sight, and what you will behold is hell 
indeed. 
Yet the release of Heaven still remains within your range of 
choice, to take the place of everything that hell would show to you. 

All you need say to any part of hell, whatever form it takes, is sim¬ 
ply this: 

"It is impossible to see two worlds. 


I seek my freedom and deliverance, 

And this is not a part of what I want." W(269) 


1265 


11-261 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 131 "No-one can fail who asks to reach the truth." 

w 131L l. 
Failure is all about you while you seek for goals which 
cannot be achieved. 
You look for permanence in the impermanent; 
for love where there is none; for safety in the midst of danger; im¬ 
mortality within the darkness of the dream of death. 
Who could 
succeed where contradiction is the setting of his searching, and the 
place to which he comes to find stability? 

W 131 L 2. 
Goals which are meaningless are not attained. 
There is no 
way to reach them, for the means by which you strive for them are 
meaningless as they are. 
Who can use such senseless means and 
hope through them to gain in anything? Where can they lead? And 
what could they achieve that offers any hope of being real? Pursuit 
of the imagined leads to death because it is the search for nothing¬ 
ness, and while you seek for life you ask for death. 
You look for 
safety and security while in your heart you pray for danger and pro¬ 
tection for the little dream you made. 


w 131L 3. 
Yet searching is inevitable here. 
For this you came, and 
you will surely do the thing you came for. 
But the world can not 
dictate the goal for which you search unless you give it power to do 
so. 
Otherwise, you still are free to choose a goal that lies beyond the 
world and every worldly thought, and one which comes to you 
from an idea relinquished yet remembered, old yet new; an echo of 
a heritage forgot, yet holding everything you really want. 


w 131L 4. 
Be glad that search you must. 
Be glad as well to learn you 
search for Fieaven, and must find the goal you really want. 
No-one 
can fail to want this goal, and reach it in the end. 
God's Son cannot 
seek vainly, though he try to force delay, deceive himself, and think 
that it is hell he seeks. 
When he is wrong he finds correction, when 
he wanders off he is led back to his appointed task. 
W(270) 

W 131 L 5. 
No-one remains in hell, for no-one can abandon his Crea¬ 
tor, nor affect His perfect, timeless and unchanging Love. 
You will 
find Heaven. 
Everything you seek but this will fall away, yet not 
because it has been taken from you. 
It will go because you do not 


11-262 


1266 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


want it. 
You will reach the goal you really want as certainly as God 
created you in sinlessness. 


W 131 L 6. 
Why wait for Heaven? It is here today. 
Time is the great 
illusion it is past or in the future. 
Yet this cannot be if it is where 
God wills His Son to be. 
How could the Will of God be in the past 
or yet to happen? What He wills is now, without a past and wholly 
futureless. 
It is as far removed from time as is a tiny candle from a 
distant star, or what you chose from what you really want, 
w 131L 7. 
Heaven remains your one alternative to this strange world 
you made and all its ways; its shifting patterns and uncertain goals, 
its painful pleasures and its tragic joys. 
God made no contradic¬ 
tions. 
What denies its own existence and attacks itself is not of Him. 

He did not make two minds, with Heaven as the glad effect of one, 
and earth the other's sorry outcome which is Heaven's opposite in 
every way. 


w 131L 8. 
God does not suffer conflict. 
Nor is His creation split in 
two. 
How could it be His Son could be in hell when God Himself 
established him in Heaven? Could he lose what the Eternal Will has 
given him to be his home forever? Let us not try longer to impose 
an alien will upon His 384 single purpose. 
He is here because He 
Wills to be, and what He wills is present now beyond the reach of 
time. 


w 131L 9. 
Today we will not choose a paradox in place of truth. 


How could the Son of God make time to take away the Will of God? 
He thus denies himself, and contradicts what has no opposite. 
He 
thinks he made a hell opposing Heaven, and believes that he abides 
in what does not exist, while Heaven is the place he cannot find. 

Leave foolish thoughts like these behind today, and turn your mind 
to true ideas instead. 
W(27l) No-one can fail who asks to reach the 
truth, and it is truth we ask to reach today. 


W 131 L 10. 
We will devote ten minutes to this goal three times today, 
and we will ask to see the rising of the real world to replace the fool- 


384 Handwritten mark-up suggests (God's). 



1267 


11-263 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


ish images that we held dear, with true ideas arising in the place of 
thoughts which have no meaning, no effect, and neither source nor 
substance in the truth. 
This we acknowledge as we start upon our 
practice periods. 
Begin with this: 

"I ask to see a different world, and think 

A different kind of thoughts from those I made. 


The world I seek I did not make alone, 

The thoughts I want to think are not my own.'' 

W 131 L 11. 
For several minutes watch your mind and see, although 
your eyes are closed, the senseless world you think is real. 
Review 
the thoughts as well which are compatible with such a world, and 
which you think are true. 
Then let them go, and sink below them to 
the holy place where they can enter not. 
There is a door beneath 
them in your mind which you could not completely lock to hide 
what lies beyond. 


W 131 L 12. 
Seek for that door and find it. 
But before you try to open 
it, remind yourself no-one can fail who asks to reach the truth, and it 
is this request you make today. 
Nothing but this has any meaning 
now; no other goal is valued now nor sought; nothing before this 
door you really want, and only what lies past it do you seek. 


W 131 L 13. 
Put out your hand and see how easily the door swings 
open with your one intent to go beyond it. 
Angels light the way, so 
that all darkness vanishes and you are standing in a light so bright 
and clear that you can understand all things you see. 
A tiny mo¬ 
ment of surprise, perhaps, will make you pause before you realize 
the world you see before you in the light reflects the truth you 
knew, and did not quite forget in wandering away in dreams. 
W(272) 
W 131 L 14. 
You cannot fail today. 
There walks with you the Spirit 
Heaven sent you that you might approach this door some day, and 
through His aid slip effortlessly past it to the light. 
Today that day 
has come. 
Today God keeps His ancient promise to His holy Son, as 
does His Son remember his to Him. 
This is a day of gladness, for we 
come to the appointed time and place where you will find the goal 


11-264 


1268 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


of all your searching here and all the seeking of the world, which 
end together as you pass beyond the door. 


w 131L 15. 
Remember often that today should be a time of special 
gladness, and refrain from dismal thoughts and meaningless la¬ 
ments. 
Salvation's time has come. 
Today is set by Heaven Itself to 
be a time of grace for you and for the world. 
If you forget this 
happy fact, remind yourself with this: 

"Today I seek and find all that I want. 


"My single purpose offers it to me. 


No-one can fail who asks to reach the truth." W(273) 


1269 


11-265 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 132 "I loose the world from all I thought it was." 

W 132 L 1 . 
What keeps the world in chains but your beliefs? And 
what can save the world except your Self? Belief is powerful in¬ 
deed. 
The thoughts you hold are mighty, and illusions are as strong 
in their effects as is the truth. 
A madman thinks the world he sees is 
real and does not doubt it. 
Nor can he be swayed by questioning his 
thoughts' effects. 
It is but when their source is raised to question 
that the hope of freedom comes to him at last, 
w 132 L 2. 
Yet is salvation easily achieved, for anyone is free to 
change his mind, and all his thoughts change with it. 
Now the 
source of thought has shifted, for to change your mind means you 
have changed the source of all ideas you think or ever thought or 
yet will think. 
You free the past from what you thought before. 
You 
free the future from all ancient thoughts of seeking what you do not 
want to find. 
The present now remains the only time, 
w 132 L 3. 
Here in the present is the world set free. 
For as you let the 
past be lifted and release the future from your ancient fears, you 
find escape and give it to the world. 
You have enslaved the world 
with all your fears, with 385 doubts and miseries, your pain and tears, 
and all your sorrows press upon it, and keep it a prisoner to your 
beliefs. 
Death strikes it everywhere because you hold the bitter 
thought of death within your mind. 


W 132 L 4. 
The world is nothing in itself. 
Your mind must give it 
meaning. 
And what you behold upon it are your wishes, acted out 
so you can look on them and think them real. 
W(274) Perhaps you 
think you did not make the world, but came unwillingly to what 
was made already, hardly waiting for your thoughts to give it mean¬ 
ing. 
Yet in truth you found exactly what you looked for when you 
came. 
There is no world apart from what you wish, and herein lies 
your ultimate release. 
Change but your mind on what you want to 
see, and all the world must change accordingly. 



,S5 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 



11-266 


1270 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 132 L 5. 
Ideas leave not their source. 
This central theme is often 
stated in the text, and must be borne in mind if you would under¬ 
stand the lesson for today. 
It is not pride that 386 tells you that you 
made the world you see, and that it changes as you change your 
mind. 
But it is pride that argues you have come into a world quite 
separate from yourself, impervious to what you think, and quite 
apart from what you chance to think it is. 


w 132 L 6. 
There is no world! This is the central thought the course 
attempts to teach. 
Not everyone is ready to accept it, and each one 
must go as far as he can let himself be led along the road to truth. 


He will return and go still farther, or perhaps step back a while and 
then return again. 
But healing is the gift of those who are prepared 
to learn there is no world, and can accept the lesson now. 
Their 
readiness will bring the lesson to them in some form which they can 
understand and recognize. 


w 132 L 7. 
Some see it suddenly on point of death, and rise to teach it. 

Others find it in experience that is not of this world, which shows 
them that the world does not exist because what they behold must 
be the truth, and yet it clearly contradicts the world. 
And some will 
find it in this course, and in the exercises that we do today, 
w 132 L 8. 
Today's idea is true because the world does not exist. 
And 
if it is indeed your own imagining, then you can loose it from all 
things you ever thought it was by merely changing all the thoughts 
that gave it these appearances. 
The sick are healed as you let go all 
thoughts of sickness, and the dead arise when you let thoughts of 
life replace all thoughts you ever held of death. 
387 W(275) 


386 Urtext manuscript has “that” struck out and (which) typed above the line. 


~’ 87 Isaiah 26:19 Your dead shall live; Together with my dead body they shall arise. 
Awake and sing, 
you who dwell in dust; For your dew is like the dew of herbs, And the earth shall cast out the dead. 

Isaiah 35:5-6 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, And the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. 

Then the lame shall leap like a deer, 

And the tongue of the dumb sing. 
For waters shall burst forth in the wilderness, And streams in the 
desert. 


Matthew 10:1 And when He had called His twelve disciples to Him, He gave them power over unclean 
spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all kinds of sickness and all kinds of disease. 


Matthew 10:8 “Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out demons. 
Freely you have 
received, freely give.” 


1271 


11-267 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


w 132 L 9. 
A lesson earlier repeated once must now be stressed again, 
for it contains the firm foundation for today's idea. 
You are as God 
created you. 
There is no place where you can suffer, and no time 
that can bring change to your eternal state. 
How can a world of 
time and place exist if you remain as God created you? 
w 132 L 10. 
What is the lesson for today except another way of saying 
that to know your Self is the salvation of the world? To free the 
world from every kind of pain is but to change your mind about 
yourself. 
There is no world apart from your ideas because ideas 
leave not their source, and you maintain the world within your 
mind in thought. 


w 132 L 11 . 
Yet if you are as God created you, you cannot think apart 
from Him, nor make what does not share His timelessness and love. 

Are these inherent in the world you see? Does it create like Him? 
Unless it does, it is not real and cannot be at all. 
If you are real the 
world you see is false, for God's creation is unlike the world in every 
way. 
And as it was His Thought by which 388 you were created, so it 
is your thoughts which made it and must set it free, that you may 
know the Thoughts you share with God. 


w 132 L 12. 
Release the world! Your real creations wait for this re¬ 
lease to give you fatherhood, not of illusions, but as God in truth. 

God shares His Fatherhood with you who are His Son, for He makes 
no distinctions in what is Himself and what is still Himself. 
What 
He creates is not apart from Him, and nowhere does the Father end, 
the Son begin as something separate from Him. 


w 132 L 13. 
There is no world because it is a thought apart from God, 
and made to separate the Father and the Son, and break away a part 
of God Himself and thus destroy His wholeness. 
Can a world 
which comes from this idea be real? Can it be anywhere? Deny il¬ 
lusions, but accept the truth. 
Deny you are a shadow briefly laid 


Matthew 11:5 “The blind see and the lame walk; the lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear; the dead are 
raised up and the poor have the gospel preached to them.” There are many more references to healing 
and raising the dead in the Bible. 


388 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Which). 



11-268 


1272 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


upon a dying world. 
Release your mind, and you will look upon a 
world released. 
W(276) 

w 132 L14. 
Today our purpose is to free the world from all the idle 
thoughts we ever held about it, and about all living things we see 
upon it. 
They can not be there, no more then we. 
For we are in the 
home our Father set for us along with them. 
And we who are as Fie 
created us would loose the world this day from every one of our il¬ 
lusions, that we may be free. 


W 132 L 15. 
Begin the fifteen minute periods in which we practice 
twice today with this: 

"I who remain as God created me 

Would loose the world from all I thought it was. 


For I am real because the world is not, 

And I woidd know my own reality." 

Then merely rest, alert but with no strain, and let your mind in qui¬ 
etness be changed so that the world is freed along with you. 


w 132 L 16. 
You need not realize that healing comes to many brothers 
far across the world as well as to the ones you see near by, as you 
send out these thoughts to bless the world. 
But you will sense your 
own release, although you may not fully understand as yet that you 
could never be released alone. 


W 132 L 17. 
Throughout the day, increase the freedom sent through 
your ideas to all the world, and say whenever you are tempted to 
deny the power of your simple change of mind: 

"I loose the world from all I thought it was, 

And choose my own reality instead ." W(277) 


1273 


11-269 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 133 "I will not value what is valueless." 

W 133 L 1 . 
Sometimes in teaching there is benefit, particularly after 
you have gone through what seems theoretical and quite remote 389 
from what the student has already learned, to bring him back to 
practical concerns. 
This we will do today. 
We will not speak of 
lofty, world-encompassing ideas, but dwell instead on benefits to 
you. 


w 133 L 2. 
You do not ask too much of life, but far too little. 
When 
you let your mind be drawn to bodily concerns, to things you buy, 
to eminence as valued by the world, you ask for sorrow, not for 
happiness. 
This course does not attempt to take from you the little 
that you have. 
It does not try to substitute utopian ideas for satisfac¬ 
tions which the world contains. 
There are no satisfactions in the 
world. 


w 133 L 3. 
Today we list the real criteria by which to test all things 
you think you want. 
Unless they meet these sound requirements, 
they are not worth desiring at all, for they can but replace what of¬ 
fers more. 
The laws which govern choice you cannot make, no more 
than you can make alternatives from which to choose. 
The choosing 
you can do; indeed you must. 
But it is wise to learn the laws you set 
in motion when you choose, and what alternatives you choose be¬ 
tween. 


w 133 L 4. 
We have already stressed there are but two, however 
many there appear to be. 
The range is set, and this we cannot 
change. 
It would be most ungenerous to you to let alternatives be 
limitless, and thus delay your final choice until you had considered 
all of them in time, and not been brought so clearly to the place 
where there is but one choice which must be made. 
W(278) 

W 133 L 5. 
Another kindly and related law is that there is no com¬ 
promise in what your choice must bring. 
It cannot give you just a 
little, for there is no in between. 
Each choice you make brings eve- 


389 Handwritten mark-up suggests (far). 



11-270 


1274 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


rything to you or nothing. 
Therefore, if you learn the tests by which 
you can distinguish everything from nothing, you will make the bet¬ 
ter choice. 


W 133 L 6. 
First, if you choose a thing that will not last forever, what 
you chose is valueless. 
A temporary value is without all value. 


Time can never take away a value that is real. 
What fades and dies 
was never there, and makes no offering to him who chooses it. 
He 
is deceived by nothing in a form he thinks he likes. 


w 133 L 7. 
Next, if you choose to take a thing away from someone 
else, you will have nothing left. 
This is because when you deny his 
right to everything, you have denied your own. 
You therefore will 
not recognize the things you really have, denying they are there. 

Who seeks to take away has been deceived by the belief 390 that loss 
can offer gain. 
Yet loss must offer loss and nothing more. 


W 133 L 8. 
Your next consideration is the one on which the others 
rest. 
Why is the choice you make of value to you? What attracts 
your mind to it? What purpose does it serve? Here it is easiest of all 
to be deceived, for what the ego wants it fails to recognize. 
It does 
not even tell the truth as it perceives it, for it needs to keep the halo 
which it uses to protect its goals from tarnish and from rust, that 
you may see how "innocent" it is. 


w 133 L 9. 
Yet is its camouflage a thin veneer which could deceive 
but those who are content to be deceived. 
Its goals are obvious to 
anyone who cares to look for them. 
Here is deception doubled, for 
the one who is deceived will not perceive that he has merely failed 
to gain. 
He will believe that he has served the ego's hidden goals, 
w 133 L 10. 
And 391 though he tries to keep its halo clear within his 
vision, yet must he perceive its tarnished edges and its rusted core. 

W(279) His ineffectual mistakes appear as sins to him because he 
looks upon the tarnish as his own, the rust a sign of deep unworthi¬ 
ness within himself. 
He who would still preserve the ego's goals 

390 The word “belief’ is overstrack and the word “illusion" typed after it. 
The word “that” immediately 
following is also overstruck out. 
The Notes has it as we do. 


391 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Yet). 



1275 


11-271 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


and serve them as his own makes no mistakes according to the dic¬ 
tates of his guide. 
This guidance teaches it is error to believe that 
sins are but mistakes, for who would suffer for his sins if this were 


so? 


W 133 L ll. 
And so we come to the criterion for choice which is the 
hardest to believe, because its obviousness is overlaid with many 
levels of obscurity. 
If you feel any guilt about your choice, you have 
allowed the ego's goals to come between the real alternatives, and 
thus you do not realize there are but two. 
And the alternative you 
think you chose seems fearful and too dangerous to be the nothing¬ 
ness it actually is. 


w 133 L 12. 
All things are valuable or valueless, worthy or not of be¬ 
ing sought at all, entirely desirable or not worth the slightest effort 
to obtain. 
Choosing is easy just because of this. 
Complexity is noth¬ 
ing but a screen of smoke which hides the very simple fact that no 
decision can be difficult. 
What is the gain to you in learning this? It 
is far more than merely letting you make choices easily and without 
pain. 


w 133 L 13. 
Heaven Itself is reached by 392 empty hands and open 
minds, which come with nothing to find everything and claim it as 
their own. 
We will attempt to reach this state today, with self- 
deception laid aside, and with an honest willingness to value but the 
truly valuable and the real. 


W 133 L 14. 
Our two extended practice periods of fifteen minutes 
will 393 begin with this: 

“I will not value what is valueless, 

And only what has value do I seek, 

For only that do I desire to find. 
” 

And then receive what waits for everyone who reaches, unencum¬ 
bered, to the gate of Heaven, which swings open as he comes . 
394 


392 Handwritten mark-up suggests (with). 


393 Handwritten mark-up suggests (each). 


394 Genesis 28:17 And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none other than the 
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!” 


11-272 


1276 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


W(280) Should you begin to let yourself collect some needless bur¬ 
dens, or believe you see some difficult decisions facing you, be quick 
to answer with this simple thought: 

“I will not value what is valueless, 

For what is valuable belongs to me." W(281) 


1277 


11-273 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 134 "Let me perceive forgiveness as it is." 

w 134 L l. 
Let us review the meaning of "forgive," for it is apt to be 
distorted and to be perceived as something which entails an unfair 
sacrifice of righteous wrath, a gift unjustified and undeserved, and a 
complete denial of the truth. 
In such a view, forgiveness must be 
seen as mere eccentric folly, and this course appears to rest salvation 
on a whim. 


w 134 L 2. 
This twisted view of what forgiveness means is easily cor¬ 
rected when you can accept the fact that pardon is not asked for 
what is true. 
It must be limited to what is false. 
It is irrelevant to 
everything except illusions. 
Truth is God's creation, and to pardon 
this 395 is meaningless. 
All truth belongs to Him, reflects His laws 
and radiates His Love. 
Does this need pardon? How can you for¬ 
give the sinless and eternally benign? 

W 134 L 3. 
The major difficulty that 396 you find in genuine forgiveness 
on your part is that you still believe you must forgive the truth and 
not illusions. 
You conceive of pardon as a vain attempt to look past 
what is there; to overlook the truth in an unfounded effort to de¬ 
ceive yourself by making an illusion true. 
This twisted viewpoint 
but reflects the hold that the idea of sin retains as yet upon your 
mind as 397 you regard yourself. 


w 134 L 4. 
Because you think your sins are real, you look on pardon 
as deception. 
For it is impossible to think of sin as true and not be¬ 
lieve forgiveness is a lie. 
Thus is forgiveness really but a sin, like all 
the rest. 
It says the truth is false, and smiles on the corrupt as if they 
were as blameless as the grass; as white as snow . 
398 It is delusional 


395 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


396 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 


397 Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed (when), the word is overstruck and replaced with “as” 
3,8 Isaiah 1:18 Come now, and let us reason together,” 

Says the LORD, 

“Though your sins are like scarlet, 

They shall be as white as snow; 

Though they are red like crimson. 


They shall be as wool. 


Isaiah 1:18 


11-274 


1278 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


in what it thinks it can accomplish. 
It would see as right the plainly 
wrong; the loathsome as the good. 
W(282) 

w 134 L 5. 
Pardon is no escape in such a view. 
It merely is a further 
sign that sin is unforgivable, at best to be concealed, denied, or 
called another name, for pardon is a treachery to truth. 
Guilt can 
not be forgiven. 
If you sin, your guilt is everlasting. 
Those who are 
forgiven from the view their sins are real are pitifully mocked and 
twice condemned; first by themselves for what they think they did, 
and once again by those who pardon them. 


W 134 L 6. 
It is sin's unreality which makes forgiveness natural and 
wholly sane, a deep relief to those who offer it; a quiet blessing 
where it is received. 
It does not countenance illusions, but collects 
them lightly, with a little laugh, and gently lays them at the feet of 
truth. 
And there they disappear entirely. 


W 134 L 7. 
Forgiveness is the only thing that stands for truth in the 
illusions of the world. 
It sees their nothingness, and looks right 
through the thousand forms in which they may appear. 
It looks on 
lies but it is not deceived. 
It does not heed the self-accusing shrieks 
of sinners mad with guilt. 
It looks on them with quiet eyes, and 
merely says to them, "My brother, what you think is not the truth." 
W 134 L 8. 
The strength of pardon is its honesty, which is so uncor¬ 
rupted that it sees illusions as illusions, not as truth. 
It is because of 
this that it becomes the undeceiver in the face of lies, the great re¬ 
storer of the simple truth. 
By its ability to overlook what is not 
there, it opens up the way to truth, which had been blocked by 
dreams of guilt. 
Now are you free to follow in the way your true 
forgiveness opens up to you. 
For if one brother has received this 
gift of you, the door is open to yourself. 


w 134 L 9. 
There is a very simple way to find the door to true for¬ 
giveness, and perceive it open wide in welcome. 
When you feel that 
you are tempted to accuse someone of sin in any form, do not allow 
your mind to dwell on what you think he did, for this is self- 

deception. 
Ask instead, "Should I accuse myself of doing this?" 
W(283) 


1279 


11-275 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


w 134 L 10. 
Thus will you see alternatives for choice in terms which 
render choosing meaningful, and keep your mind as free of guilt 
and pain as God Himself intended it to be, and as it is in truth. 
It is 
but lies which would condemn. 
In truth is innocence the only thing 
there is. 
Forgiveness stands between illusions and the truth, be¬ 
tween the world you see and that which lies beyond, between the 
hell of guilt and Heaven's gate. 


w 134 L 11 . 
Across this bridge, as powerful as Love Which laid Its 
blessing on it, are all dreams of evil and of hatred and attack 
brought silently to truth. 
They are not kept to swell and bluster and 
to terrify the foolish dreamer who believes in them. 
He has been 
gently wakened from his dream by understanding what he thought 
he saw was never there. 
And now he cannot feel that all escape has 
been denied to him. 


w 134 L 12. 
He does not have to fight to save himself. 
He does not 
have to kill the dragons which he thought pursued him. 
Nor need 
he erect the heavy walls of stone and iron doors he thought would 
make him safe. 
He can remove the ponderous and useless armor 
made to chain his mind to fear and misery. 
His step is light, and as 
he lifts his foot to stride ahead, a star is left behind to point the way 
to those who follow him. 


w 134 L 13. 
Forgiveness must be practiced for the world cannot per¬ 
ceive its meaning, nor provide a guide to teach you its beneficence. 

There is no thought in all the world which leads to any understand¬ 
ing of the laws it follows, nor the Thought which it reflects. 
It is as 
alien to the world as is your own reality. 
And yet it joins your mind 
with the reality in you. 


W 134 L 14. 
Today we practice true forgiveness that the time of join¬ 
ing be no more delayed. 
For we would meet with our Reality 399 in 
freedom and in peace. 
Our practicing becomes the footsteps light- 


399 Handwritten mark-up suggests (reality). 



11-276 


1280 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


ening up the way for all our brothers, who will follow us to the Re¬ 
ality 400 we share with them. 
W(284) 

W 134 L 15. 
That this may be accomplished, let us give a quarter of an 
hour twice today, and spend it with the Guide Who understands the 
meaning of forgiveness, and was sent to us to teach it. 
Let us ask of 


Him: 


"Let me perceive forgiveness as it is." 

w 134 L 16. 
Then choose one brother as He will direct, and catalogue 
his "sins" as one by one they cross your mind. 
Be certain not to 
dwell on any one of them, but realize that you are using his "of¬ 
fenses" but to save the world from all ideas of sin. 
Briefly consider 
all the evil things you thought of him, and each time ask yourself 
"Would I condemn myself for doing this?" 

W 134 L 17. 
Let him be freed from all the thoughts you had of sin in 
him. 
And now you are prepared for freedom. 
If you have been 
practicing thus far in willingness and honesty, you will begin to 
sense a lifting up, a lightening of weight across your chest, a deep 
and certain feeling of relief. 
The time remaining should be given to 
experiencing the escape from all the heavy chains you sought to lay 
upon your brother, which were laid upon yourself. 


W 134 L 18. 
Forgiveness should be practiced through the day, for there 
will 401 be so many times when you forget its meaning, and attack your¬ 
self. 
When this occurs, allow your mind to see through this illusion as 
you tell yourself: 

"Let me perceive forgiveness as it is. 


Would 402 1 accuse myself of doing this? 

I will not lay this chain upon myself ." 

In everything you do remember this: 

No-one is crucified alone, and yet, 

No-one can enter Heaven by himself. 
W(285) 


400 Handwritten mark-up suggests (reality). 


401 Handwritten mark-up suggests (still). 


402 In the Notes this was originally written “Would” which is crossed out and “Should” written in. 
FIP 
switches it back to “Would” which does seem rather better. 



1281 


11-277 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 135 "If I defend myself I am attacked." 

w 135 L l. 
Who would defend himself unless he thought he was at¬ 
tacked, that the attack is real, and that his own defense can save 
himself? And herein lies the folly of defense; it gives illusions full 
reality, and then attempts to handle them as real. 
It adds illusions to 
illusions, thus making correction doubly difficult. 
And it is this you 
do when you attempt to plan the future, activate the past, or organ¬ 
ize the present as you wish. 


w 135 L 2. 
You operate from the belief you must protect yourself 
from what is happening, because it must contain what threatens 
you. 
A sense of threat is an acknowledgment of an inherent weak¬ 
ness; a belief that there is danger which has power to call on you to 
make appropriate defense. 


w 135 L 3. 
Tire world is based on this insane belief. 
And all its struc¬ 
tures, all its thoughts and doubts, its penalties and heavy arma¬ 
ments, its legal definitions and its codes, its ethics and its leaders 
and its gods, all serve but to preserve its sense of threat. 
For no-one 
walks the world in armature but must have terror striking at his 
heart. 


W 135 L 4. 
Defense is frightening. 
It stems from fear, increasing fear 
as each defense is made. 
You think it offers safety. 
Yet it speaks of 
fear made real and terror justified. 
Is it not strange you do not 
pause to ask, as you elaborate your plans and make your armor 
thicker and your locks more tight, what you defend, and how, and 
against what? 

W 135 L 5. 
Let us consider first what you defend. 
It must be some¬ 
thing that is very weak and easily assaulted. 
It must be something 
made easy prey, unable to protect itself, and needing your defense. 

What but the body has such frailty that constant care and watchful, 
deep concern are needful to protect its little life? W(286) What but the 
body falters and must fail to serve the Son of God as worthy host? 

W 135 L 6. 
Yet it is not the body that can fear, nor be a thing to fear. 
It 
has no needs but those which you assign to it. 
It needs no compli- 


11-278 


1282 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


cated structures of defense, no health-inducing medicine, no care 
and no concern at all. 
Defend its life, or give it gifts to make It beau¬ 
tiful or walls to make it safe, and you but say your home is open to 
the thief of time, corruptible and crumbling, so unsafe it must be 
guarded with your very life. 


w 135 L 7. 
Is not this picture fearful? Can you be at peace with such 
a concept of your home? Yet what endowed the body with the right 
to serve you thus except your own belief? It is your mind which 
gave the body all the functions that you see in it, and set its value far 
beyond a little pile of dust and water . 
403 Who would make defense 
of something that he recognized as this? 

w 135 L 8. 
The body is in need of no defense. 
This cannot be too of¬ 
ten emphasized. 
It will be strong and healthy if the mind does not 
abuse it by assigning it to roles it cannot fill, to purposes beyond its 
scope, and to exalted aims which it cannot accomplish. 
Such at¬ 
tempts, ridiculous yet deeply cherished, are the sources for the 
many mad attacks you make upon it. 
For it seems to fail your 
hopes, your needs, your values and your dreams, 
w 135 L 9. 
The "self" that needs protection is not real. 
The body, val¬ 
ueless and hardly worth the least defense, need merely be perceived 
as quite apart from you, and it becomes a healthy, serviceable in¬ 
strument through which the mind can operate until its usefulness is 
over. 
Who would want to keep it when its usefulness is done? 

W 135 L 10. 
Defend the body and you have attacked your mind. 
For 
you have seen in it the faults, the weaknesses, the limits and the 
lacks from which you think the body must be saved. 
You will not 
see the mind as separate from bodily conditions. 
And you will im¬ 
pose upon the body all the pain that comes from the conception of 
the mind as limited and fragile, and apart from other minds W(287) 
and separate from its Source. 



103 Genesis 2:6-7 but a mist went up from the earth and watered the whole face of the ground. 
And the 
LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and 
man became a living being. 



1283 


11-279 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


w 135 L li. 
These are the thoughts in need of healing, and the body 
will respond with health when they have been corrected and re¬ 
placed with truth. 
This is the body's only real defense. 
Yet is this 
where you look for its defense? You offer it protection of a kind 
from which it gains no benefit at all, but merely adds to your dis¬ 
tress of mind. 
You do not heal, but merely take away the hope of 
healing, for you fail to see where hope must lie if it be meaningful, 
w 135 L 12. 
A healed mind does not plan. 
It carries out the plans 
which it receives through listening to Wisdom that is not its own. 
It 
waits until it has been taught what should be done, and then pro¬ 
ceeds to do it. 
It does not depend upon itself for anything except its 
adequacy to fulfill the plans assigned to it. 
It is secure in certainty 
that obstacles can not impede its progress to accomplishment of any 
goal which serves the greater plan established for the good of eve¬ 
ryone. 


W 135 L 13. 
A healed mind is relieved from the belief that it must 
plan, although it cannot know the outcome which is best, the means 
by which it is achieved, nor how to recognize the problem that the 
plan is made to solve. 
It must misuse the body in its plans until it 
recognizes this is so. 
But when it has accepted this as true, then is it 
healed, and lets the body go. 


w 135 L 14. 
Enslavement of the body to the plans the unhealed mind 
sets up to save itself must make the body sick. 
It is not free to be a 
means of helping in a plan which far exceeds its own protection and 
which needs its service for a little while. 
In this capacity is health 
assured. 
For everything the mind employs for this will function 
flawlessly, and with the strength that has been given it and cannot 
fail. 
W(288) 

w 135 L 15. 
It is, perhaps, not easy to perceive that self-initiated plans 
are but defenses, with the purpose all of them were made to realize. 

They are the means by which a frightened mind would undertake 
its own protection at the cost of truth. 
This is not difficult to realize 


11-280 


1284 

PROOF COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


in some forms which these self-deceptions take, for 404 the denial of 
reality is very obvious. 
Yet planning is not often recognized as a 
defense. 


W 135 L 16. 
The mind engaged in planning for itself is occupied in 
setting up control of future happenings. 
It does not think that it will 
be provided for unless it makes its own provisions. 
Time becomes a 
future emphasis, to be controlled by learning and experience ob¬ 
tained from past events and previous beliefs. 
It 405 overlooks the 
present, for it rests on the idea the past has taught enough to let the 
mind direct its future course. 


W 135 L 17. 
The mind that plans is thus refusing to allow for change. 

What it has learned before becomes the basis for its future goals. 
Its 
past experience directs its choice of what will happen. 
And it does 
not see that here and now is everything it needs to guarantee a fu¬ 
ture quite unlike the past, without a continuity of any old ideas and 
sick beliefs. 
Anticipation plays no part at all, for present confidence 
directs the way. 


w 135 L 18. 
Defenses are the plans you undertake to make against the 
truth. 
Their aim is to select what you approve, and disregard what 
you consider incompatible with your beliefs of your reality. 
Yet 
what remains is meaningless indeed. 
For it is your reality which is 
the "threat" that your defenses would attack, obscure, and take 
apart and crucify. 
W(289) 

W 135 L 19. 
What could you not accept, if you but knew that every¬ 
thing which happens, all events, past, present and to come, are gen¬ 
tly planned by One Whose only purpose is your good? Perhaps you 
have misunderstood His plan, for He would never offer pain to you. 

But your defenses did not let you see His loving blessing shine in 
every step you ever took. 
While you made plans for death. 
He led 
you gently to Eternal Life. 



404 Handwritten mark-up suggests (where?). 

403 Handwritten mark-up suggests (This?). 



1285 


11-281 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 135 L 20. 
Your present trust in Him is the defense which promises 
a future undisturbed, without a trace of sorrow, and with joy which 
constantly increases as this life becomes a holy instant, set in time, 
but heeding only immortality. 
Let no defenses but your present 
trust direct the future, and this life becomes a meaningful encounter 
with the truth that only your defenses would conceal, 
w 135 L 21. 
Without defenses, you become a light which Heaven 
gratefully acknowledges to be its own. 
And it will lead you on in 
ways appointed for your happiness according to the ancient plan, 
begun when time was born. 
Your followers will join their light with 
yours, and it will be increased until the world is lighted up with joy. 

And gladly will our brothers lay aside their cumbersome defenses 
which availed them nothing, and could only terrify. 


W 135 L 22. 
We will anticipate that time today with present confi¬ 
dence, for this is part of what was planned for us. 
We will be sure 
that everything we need is given us for our accomplishment of this 
today. 
We make no plans for how it will be done, but realize that 
our defenselessness is all that is required for the truth to dawn upon 
our minds with certainty. 


w 135 L 23. 
For fifteen minutes twice today we rest from senseless 
planning, and from every thought which blocks the truth from en¬ 
tering our minds. 
Today we will receive instead of plan, that we 
may give instead of organize. 
And we are given truly, as we say: 

"If I defend myself I am attacked. 


But in defenselessness I will be strong, 

And I will learn what my defenses hide." W(290) 

w 135 L 24. 
Nothing but that. 
If there are plans to make, you will be 
told of them. 
They may not be the plans you thought were needed, 
nor indeed the answers to the problems which you thought con¬ 
fronted you. 
But they are answers to another kind of question, 
which remains unanswered, yet in need of answering until the An¬ 
swer comes to you at last. 



11-282 


1286 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


W 135 L 25. 
All your defenses have been aimed at not receiving what 
you will receive today. 
And in the light and joy of simple truth, you 
will but wonder why you ever thought that you must be defended 
from release. 
Heaven asks nothing. 
It is hell that makes extravagant 
demands for sacrifice. 
You give up nothing in these times today 
when, undefended you present yourself to your Creator as you 
really are. 


W 135 L 26. 
He has remembered you. 
Today we will remember Him. 

For this is Easter time in your salvation. 
And you rise again from 
what was seeming death and hopelessness. 
Now is the light of hope 
reborn in you, for now you come without defense to learn the part 
for you within the plan of God. 
What little plans or magical beliefs 
can still have value, when you have received your function from the 
Voice of God Himself? 

w 135 L 27. 
Try not to shape this day as you believe would benefit 
you most. 
For you can not conceive of all the happiness that comes 
to you without your planning. 
Learn today. 
And all the world will 
take this giant stride, and celebrate your Easter time with you. 

Throughout the day, as foolish little things appear to raise defen¬ 
siveness in you and tempt you to engage in weaving plans, remind 
yourself this is a special day for learning, and acknowledge it with 
this: 

"This is Easter time. 
And I would keep 

It holy. 
I will not defend myself 

Because the Son of God needs no defense 

Against the truth of his Reality." W(291) 


1287 


11-283 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 136 "Sickness is a defense against the truth." 

w 136 L l. 
No-one can heal unless he understands what purpose sick¬ 
ness seems to serve. 
For then he understands as well its purpose 
has no meaning. 
Being causeless and without a meaningful intent of 
any kind, it cannot be at all. 
When this is seen, healing is automatic. 

It dispels this meaningless illusion by the same approach which car¬ 
ries all of them to truth, and merely leaves them there to disappear, 
w 136 L 2. 
Sickness is not an accident. 
Like all defenses, it is an in¬ 
sane device for self deception. 
And like all the rest its purpose is to 
hide reality, attack it, change it, render it inept, distort it, twist it, or 
reduce it to a little pile of unassembled parts. 
The aim of all de¬ 
fenses is to keep the truth from being whole. 
The parts are seen as if 
each one were whole within itself. 


W 136 L 3. 
Defenses are not unintentional, nor are they made without 
awareness. 
They are secret magic wands you wave when truth ap¬ 
pears to threaten what you would believe. 
They seem to be uncon¬ 
scious but because of the rapidity with which you choose to use 
them. 
In that second, even less, in which the choice is made, you 
recognize exactly what you would attempt to do, and then proceed 
to think that it is done. 


w 136 L 4. 
Who but yourself evaluates a threat, decides escape is nec¬ 
essary, and sets up a series of defenses to reduce the threat that has 
been judged as real? All this cannot be done unconsciously. 
But 
afterwards your plan requires that you must forget you made it, so 
it seems to be external to your own intent; a happening beyond your 
state of mind, an outcome with a real effect on you, instead of one 
effected by your self. 
W(292) 

W 136 L 5. 
It is this quick forgetting of the part you play in making 
your "reality" which makes defenses seem to be beyond your own 
control. 
But what you have forgot can be remembered, given will¬ 
ingness to reconsider the decision which is doubly shielded by 
oblivion. 
Your not remembering is but the sign that this decision 
still remains in force, as far as your desires are concerned. 
Mistake 


11-284 


1288 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


this not for fact. 
Defenses must make facts unrecognizable. 
They 
aim at doing this, and this they seem to do. 

w 136 L 6. 
Every defense takes fragments of the whole, assembles 
them without regard to all their true relationships, and thus con¬ 
structs illusions of a whole which 406 is not there. 
It is this process 
which imposes threat, and not whatever outcome may result. 
When 
parts are wrested from the whole and seen as separate and as 
wholes within themselves, they become symbols standing for attack 
upon the whole, successful in effect, and never to be seen as whole 
again. 
And yet you have forgotten that they stand but for your own 
decision of what should be real, to take the place of what is real. 


w 136 L 7. 
Sickness is a decision. 
It is not a thing that happens to you 
quite unsought, which makes you weak and brings you suffering. 
It 
is a choice you make, a plan you lay when, for an instant, truth 
arises in your own deluded mind, and all your world appears to tot¬ 
ter and prepare to fall. 
Now are you sick, that truth may go away, 
and threaten your establishments no more. 
How do you think that 
sickness can succeed in shielding you from truth? Because it proves 
the body is not separate from you, and so you must be separate 
from the truth. 


w 136 L 8. 
You suffer pain because the body does, and in this pain 
are you made one with it. 
Thus is your "true" identity preserved, 
and the strange, haunting thought that you might be something be¬ 
yond this little pile of dust silenced and stilled. 
For see, this dust 
can make you suffer, twist your limbs and stop your heart, com¬ 
manding you to die and cease to be. 
W(293) 

W 136 L 9. 
Thus is the body stronger than the truth, which asks you 
live but cannot overcome your choice to die. 
And so the body is 
more powerful than Everlasting Life, Heaven more frail than hell, 
and God's design for the salvation of His Son opposed by a decision 
stronger than His Will. 
His Son is dust, the Father incomplete, and 
chaos sits in triumph on His throne. 



406 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



1289 


11-285 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 136 L 10. 
Such is your planning for your own defense. 
And you 
believe that Heaven quails before such mad attacks as these, with 
God made blind by your illusions, truth turned into lies, and all the 
universe made slaves to laws which your defenses would impose on 
it. 
Yet who believes illusions but the one who made them up? Who 
else can see them and react to them as if they were the truth? 
w 136 L 11 . 
God knows not of your plans to change His Will. 
The 
universe remains unheeding of the laws by which you thought to 
govern it. 
And Heaven has not bowed to hell, nor life to death. 
You 
can but choose to think you die, or suffer sickness or distort the 
truth in any way. 
What is created is apart from all of this. 
Defenses 
are plans to defeat what cannot be attacked. 
What is unalterable 
cannot change. 
And what is wholly sinless cannot sin. 


w 136 L 12. 
Such is the simple truth. 
It does not make appeal to 
might nor triumph. 
It does not command obedience, nor seek to 
prove how pitiful and futile your attempts to plan defenses which 
would alter it. 
It 407 merely wants to give you happiness, for such its 
purpose is. 
Perhaps it sighs a little when you throw away its gifts, 
and yet it knows with perfect certainty that what God wills for you 
must be received. 


W 136 L 13. 
It is this fact which demonstrates that time is an illusion. 

For it 408 lets you think what God has given you is not the truth right 
now, as it must be. 
The Thoughts of God are quite apart from time. 

For time is but another meaningless defense you made against the 
truth. 
Yet what God wills is here, and you remain as He created 
you. 
W(294) 

w 136 L 14. 
Truth has a power far beyond defense, for no illusions 
can remain where it has been allowed to enter. 
And it comes to any 
mind that would lay down its arms and cease to play with folly. 
It 
is found at any time; today, if you will choose to practice giving 
welcome to the truth. 



407 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Truth). 


408 Handwritging suggests (time?). 



11-286 


1290 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


W 136 L 15. 
This is our aim today. 
And we will give a quarter of an 
hour twice to ask the truth to come to us and set us free . 
409 And 
truth will come, for it has never been apart from us. 
It merely waits 
for just this invitation which we give today. 
We introduce it with a 
healing prayer to help us rise above defensiveness, and let the truth 
be as it has always been: 

"Sickness is a defense against the truth. 


I will accept the truth of what I am, 

And let my mind be wholly healed today." 

W 136 L 16. 
Healing will flash across your open mind as peace and 
truth arise to take the place of war and vain imaginings. 
There will 
be no dark corners sickness can conceal and keep defended from the 
light of truth. 
There will be no dim figures from your dreams, nor 
their obscure and meaningless pursuits with double purposes in¬ 
sanely sought, remaining in your mind. 
It will be healed of all the 
sickly wishes that it tried to authorize the body to obey. 


w 136 L 17. 
Now is the body healed because the source of sickness 
has been opened to relief. 
And you will recognize you practiced 
well by this; the body should not feel at all. 
If you have been suc¬ 
cessful, there will be no sense of feeling ill or feeling well, of pain or 
pleasure. 
No response at all is in the mind to what the body does. 


Its usefulness remains, and nothing more. 


W 136 L 18. 
Perhaps you do not realize that this removes the limits 
you had placed upon the body by the purposes you gave to it. 
As 
these are laid aside, the strength the body has will always be enough 
to serve all truly useful purposes. 
The body's health is fully guaran¬ 
teed because it is not limited by time, by weather or fatigue, by food 
and drink, or any laws you made it serve before. 
You need do noth¬ 
ing now to make it well, for sickness has become impossible. 
W(295) 

w 136 L 19. 
Yet this protection needs to be preserved by careful 
watching. 
If you let your mind harbor attack thoughts, yield to 
judgment or make plans against uncertainties to come, you have 

409 John 8:32 “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” 


1291 


11-287 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


again misplaced yourself, and made a bodily identity which will 
attack the body, for the mind is sick. 
Give instant remedy, should 
this occur, by not allowing your defensiveness to hurt you longer. 

Do not be confused about what must be healed, but tell yourself: 

"I have forgotten what I really am, 

For I mistook my body for myself. 


Sickness is a defense against the truth, 

But I am not a body. 
And my mind 
Cannot attack. 
So I can not be sick." W(296) 


11-288 


1292 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 137 "When I am healed, I am not healed alone." 

w 137 L l. 
Today's idea remains the central thought on which salva¬ 
tion rests. 
For healing is the opposite of all 410 the world's ideas 
which dwell on sickness and on separate states. 
Sickness is a retreat 
from others, and a shutting off of joining. 
It becomes a door that 
closes on a separate self, and keeps it isolated and alone. 


w 137 L 2. 
Sickness is isolation. 
For it seems to keep one self apart 
from all the rest, to suffer what the others do not feel. 
It gives the 
body final power to make separation real and keep the mind in soli¬ 
tary prison, split apart and held in pieces by a solid wall of sickened 
flesh which it can not surmount. 
The world obeys the laws that 
sickness serves, but healing operates apart from them. 


W 137 L 3. 
It is impossible that anyone be healed alone. 
In sickness 
must he be apart and separate. 
But healing is his own decision to be 
one again, and to accept his Self with all its parts intact and unas¬ 
sailed. 
In sickness does his Self appear to be dismembered and 
without the unity which gives It life. 
But healing is accomplished as 
he sees the body has no power to attack the universal Oneness of 
God's Son. 
Sickness would prove that lies must be the truth. 
But 
healing demonstrates that truth is true. 


w 137 L 4. 
The separation sickness would impose has never really 
happened. 
To be healed is merely to accept what always was the 
simple truth, and always will remain exactly as it has forever been. 

Yet eyes accustomed to illusions must be shown that what they look 
upon is false. 
So healing, never needed by the truth, must demon¬ 
strate that sickness is not real. 
W(297) 

w 137 L 5. 
Healing might thus be called a counter-dream which can¬ 
cels out the dream of sickness in the name of truth, but not in truth 
itself. 
Just as forgiveness overlooks all sins that never were accom¬ 
plished, healing but removes illusions that have not occurred. 
Just 
as the real world will arise to take the place of what has never been 


410 The Urtext manuscript reads “the all the” which is clearly an error. 
We’ve removed the first “the” 
to conform to the Notes. 



1293 


11-289 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


at all, healing 411 offers restitution for imagined states and false ideas 
which dreams embroider into pictures of the truth. 


W 137 L 6. 
Yet think not healing is unworthy of your function here. 

For anti-Christ becomes more powerful than Christ to those who 
dream the world is real. 
412 The body seems to be more solid and 
more stable than the mind. 
And love becomes a dream, while fear 
remains the one reality which can be seen and justified and fully 
understood. 


w 137 L 7. 
Just as forgiveness shines away all sin, and the real world 
will occupy the place of what you made, so healing must replace the 
fantasies of sickness which you hold before the simple truth. 
When 
sickness has been seen to disappear in spite of all the laws which 
hold it cannot but be real, then questions have been answered. 
And 
the laws can be no longer cherished nor obeyed, 
w 137 L 8. 
Healing is freedom, for it demonstrates that dreams will 
not prevail against the truth. 
Healing is shared. 
And by this attrib¬ 
ute it proves that laws unlike the ones which hold that sickness is 
inevitable are more potent than their sickly opposites. 
Healing is 
strength. 
For by its gentle hand is weakness overcome. 
And minds 
which were walled off within a body free to join with other minds, 
to be forever strong. 
W(298) 

w 137 L 9. 
Healing, forgiveness, and the glad exchange of all the 
world of sorrow for a world where sadness cannot enter, are the 
means by which the Holy Spirit urges you to follow Him. 
His gen¬ 
tle lessons teach how easily salvation can be yours; how little prac¬ 
tice you need undertake to let His laws replace the ones you made, 
to hold yourself a prisoner to death. 
His life becomes your own as 
you extend the little help He asks in freeing you from everything 
that ever caused you pain. 



411 Handwritten mark-up suggests (but). 


' 1 John 2:18 Little children, it is the last hour; and as you have heard that the Antichrist is coming, 
even now many antichrists have come, by which we know that it is the last hour. 


1 John 2:22 Who is a liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist who denies the 
Father and the Son. 



11-290 


1294 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 137 L 10. 
And as you let yourself be healed, you see all those 
around you, or who cross your mind, or whom you touch, or those 
who seem to have no contact with you, healed along with you. 
Per¬ 
haps you will not recognize them all, nor realize how great your of¬ 
fering to all the world, when you let healing come to you. 
But you 
are never healed alone. 
And legions upon legions will receive the 
gift which you receive when you are healed. 


w 137 L 11 . 
Those who are healed become the instruments of healing. 

Nor does time elapse between the instant they are healed and all the 
grace of healing it is given them to give. 
What is opposed to God 
does not exist, and 413 who accepts it not within his mind becomes a 
haven where the weary can remain to rest. 
For here is truth be¬ 
stowed, and here are all illusions brought to truth. 


w 137 L 12. 
Would you not offer shelter to God's will? You but invite 
your Self to be at home, and can this invitation be refused? Ask the 
inevitable to occur and you will never fail. 
The other choice is but to 
ask what cannot be to be, and this cannot succeed. 
Today we ask 
that only truth will occupy our minds; that thoughts of healing will 
this day go forth from what is healed to what must yet be healed, 
aware that they will both occur as one. 
W(299) 

w 137 L 13. 
We will remember, as the hour strikes, our function is to 
let our minds be healed that we may carry healing to the world, ex¬ 
changing curse for blessing, pain for joy, and separation for the 
peace of God. 
Is not a minute of the hour worth the giving to re¬ 
ceive a gift like this? Is not a little time a small expense to offer for 
the gift of everything? 

w 137 L 14. 
Yet must we be prepared for such a gift. 
And so we will 
begin the day with this, and give ten minutes to these thoughts with 
which we will conclude today at night as well: 

"When I am healed I am not healed alone. 


And I would share my healing with the world, 

411 The Urtext manuscript has a full stop here, beginning a new sentence but the handwriting changes 
that to a comma, which change we agree with. 



1295 


11-291 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


That sickness may be banished from the mind 
Of God's One Son, Who is my only Self." 

W 137 L 15. 
Let healing be through you this very day. 
And as you 
rest in quiet be prepared to give as you receive, to hold but what 
you give, and to receive the Word of God to take the place of all the 
foolish thoughts that ever were imagined. 
Now we come together 
to make well all that was sick, and offer blessing where there was 
attack. 
Nor will we let this function be forgot as every hour of the 
day slips by, remembering our function 414 with this thought: 

"When I am healed I am not healed alone. 


And I would bless my brothers, for I woidd 

Be healed with them as they are healed with me." W(300) 


414 Handwritten mark-up suggests (purpose?). 



11-292 


1296 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 138 "Heaven is the decision I must make." 

w 138 L l. 
In this world Heaven is a choice, because here we believe 
there are alternatives to choose between. 
415 We think that all things 
have an opposite, and what we want we choose. 
If Heaven exists 
there must be hell as well, for contradiction is the way we make 
what we perceive and what we think is real. 


W 138 L 2. 
Creation knows no opposite. 
But here is opposition part 
of being "real." It is this strange perception of the truth which 416 
makes the choice of Heaven seen to be the same as the relinquish¬ 
ment of hell. 
It is not really thus. 
Yet what is true in God's creation 
cannot enter here, until it is reflected in some form the world can 
understand. 
Truth cannot come where it could only be perceived 
with fear, for this would be the error truth can be brought to illu¬ 
sions. 
Opposition makes the truth unwelcome, and it cannot come, 
w 138 L 3. 
Choice is the obvious escape from what appears as oppo¬ 
sites. 
Decision lets one of conflicting goals become the aim of effort 
and expenditure of time. 
Without decision time is but a waste and 
effort dissipated. 
It is spent for nothing in return. 
And time goes by 
without results. 
There is no sense of gain, for nothing is accom¬ 
plished; nothing learned. 


W 138 L 4. 
You need to be reminded that you think a thousand 
choices are confronting you when there is really only one to make. 

And even this but seems to be a choice. 
Do not confuse yourself 
with all the doubts that myriad decisions would induce. 
You make 
but one. 
And when that one is made, you will perceive it was no 
choice at all, for truth is true and nothing else is real. 
There is no 

opposite to choose instead. 
There is no contradiction to the truth. 

W(301) 

W 138 L 5. 
Choosing depends on learning. 
But 417 the truth cannot be 
learned but only recognized. 
In recognition its acceptance lies, and 


415 The Urtext manuscript has “from” overstruck and replaced with “between”. 


416 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


417 Handwritten mark-up suggests (And). 



1297 


11-293 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


as it is accepted it is known. 
But knowledge is beyond the goals we 
seek to teach within the framework of this course. 
Ours are teaching 
goals to be attained through learning how to reach them, what they 
are, and what they offer you. 
Decisions are the outcome of your 
learning, for they rest on what you have accepted as the truth of 
what you are and what your needs must be. 


w 138 L 6. 
In this insanely complicated world Heaven appears to take 
the form of choice, rather than merely being what it is. 
Of all the 
choices you have tried to make this is the simplest, most definitive, 
the prototype of all the rest, the one which settles all decisions. 
If 
you could decide the rest, this one remains unsolved. 
But when you 
solve this one the others are resolved with it, for all decisions but 
conceal this one by taking different forms. 
Here is the final and the 
only choice in which is truth accepted or denied. 


W 138 L 7. 
So we begin today considering the choice that time was 
made to help us make. 
Such is its holy purpose, now transformed 
from the intent you gave it; that it be a means for demonstrating hell 
is real, hope changes to despair, and life itself must in the and be 
overcome by death. 
In death alone are opposites resolved, for end¬ 
ing opposition is to die. 
And thus salvation must be seen as death, 
for life is seen as conflict. 
To resolve the conflict is to end your life 
as well. 


W 138 L 8. 
These mad beliefs can gain unconscious hold of great in¬ 
tensity, and grip the mind with terror and anxiety so strong that it 
will not relinquish its ideas about its own protection. 
It must be 
saved from salvation, threatened to be safe, and magically armored 
against truth. 
And these decisions are made unaware to keep them 
safely undisturbed, apart from question and from reason and from 
doubt. 
W(302) 

w 138 L 9. 
Heaven is chosen consciously. 
The choice cannot be made 
until alternatives are accurately seen and understood. 
All that is 
veiled in shadows must be raised to understanding to be judged 
again, this time with Heaven's help, and all mistakes in judgment 
which the mind had made before are open to correction as the truth 


11-294 


1298 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


dismisses them as causeless. 
Now are they without effects. 
They 
cannot be concealed because their nothingness is recognized. 


w 138 L 10 . 
The conscious choice of Heaven is as sure as is the ending 
of the fear of hell, when it is raised from its protective shield of un¬ 
awareness, and is brought to light. 
Who can decide between the 
clearly seen and the unrecognized? Yet who can fail to make a 
choice between alternatives when only one is seen as valuable; the 
other as a wholly worthless thing, a but imagined source of guilt 
and pain? 

w 138 L 11 . 
Who hesitates to make a choice like this? And shall we 
hesitate to choose today? We make the choice for Heaven as we 
wake, and spend five minutes making sure that we have made the 
one decision that is sane. 
We recognize we make a conscious choice 
between what has existence and what has nothing but an appear¬ 
ance of the truth. 
Its pseudo-being brought to what is real, is flimsy 
and transparent in the light. 
It holds no terror now, for what was 
made enormous, vengeful, pitiless with hate, demands obscurity for 
fear to be invested there. 
Now it is recognized as but a foolish, triv¬ 
ial mistake. 
W(303) 

w 138 L 12. 
Before we close our eyes in sleep tonight we reaffirm the 
choice that we have made each hour in between. 
And now we give 
the last five minutes of our waking day to the decision with which 
we awoke. 
As every hour passed, we have declared our choice 
again in a brief quiet time devoted to maintaining sanity. 
And fi¬ 
nally we close the day with this, acknowledging we chose but what 
we want: 

"Heaven is the decision I must make. 


I make it now and will not change my mind, 

Because it is the only thing I want." W(304) 


1299 


11-295 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 139 "I will accept Atonement for myself." 

w 139 L l. 
Here is the end of choice. 
For here we come to a decision 
to accept ourselves as God created us. 
And what is choice except 
uncertainty of what we are? There is no doubt that is not rooted 
here. 
There is no question but reflects this one. 
There is no conflict 
that does not entail the single simple question, "What am I?" 

w 139 L 2. 
Yet who could ask this question except one who has re¬ 
fused to recognize himself? Only refusal to accept yourself could 
make the question seem to be sincere. 
The only thing that can be 
surely known by any living thing is what it is. 
From this one point 
of certainty it looks on other things as certain as itself. 


W 139 L 3. 
Uncertainty about what you must be is self-deception on a 
scale so vast its magnitude can hardly be conceived. 
To be alive and 
not to know yourself is to believe that you are really dead. 
For what 
is life except to be yourself, and what but you can be alive instead? 
Who is the doubter? What is it he doubts? Whom does he ques¬ 
tion? Who can answer him? 

w 139 L 4. 
He merely states that he is not himself and therefore, being 
something else, becomes a questioner of what that something is. 
Yet 
he could never be alive at all unless he knew the answer. 
If he asks 
as if he did not know, it merely shows he does not want to be the 
thing he is. 
He has accepted it because he lives; has judged against 
it and denied its worth; and has decided that he does not know the 
only certainty by which he lives. 


W 139 L 5. 
Thus he becomes uncertain of his life, for what it is has 
been denied by him. 
W(305) It is for this denial that you need Atone¬ 
ment. 
Your denial made no change in what you are. 
But you have 
split your mind into what knows and does not know the truth. 
You 
are yourself. 
There is no doubt of this, and yet you doubt it. 
But 
you do not ask what part of you can really doubt yourself. 
It cannot 
really be a part of you that asks this question, for it asks of one who 
knows the answer. 
Were it part of you, uncertainty would be im¬ 
possible. 



11-296 


1300 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


w 139 L 6. 
Atonement remedies the strange idea that it is possible to 
doubt yourself and be unsure of what you really are. 
This is the 
depth of madness. 
Yet it is the universal question of the world. 

What does this prove except the world is mad? Why share its mad¬ 
ness in the sad belief that what is universal here is true? Nothing 
the world believes is true. 
It is a place whose purpose is to be a 
home where those who claim they do not know themselves can 
come to question what it is they are. 


w 139 L 7. 
And they will come again until the time Atonement is ac¬ 
cepted, and they learn it is impossible to doubt yourself and not to 
be aware of what you are. 
Only acceptance can be asked of you, for 
what you are is certain. 
It is set forever in the holy Mind of God and 
in your own. 
It is so far beyond all doubt and question that to ask 
what it must be is all the proof you need to show that you believe 
the contradiction that you know not what you cannot fail to know. 


W 139 L 8. 
Is this a question or a statement which denies itself in 
statement? Let us not allow our holy minds to occupy themselves 
with senseless musings such as this. 
We have a mission here. 
We 
did not come to reinforce the madness which we once believed in. 

Let us not forget the goal that we accepted. 
It is more than just our 
happiness alone we came to gain. 


w 139 L 9. 
What we accept as what we are proclaims what everyone 
must be along with us. 
W(306) Fail not your brothers, or you fail 
yourself. 
Look lovingly on them that they may know that they are 
part of you and you of them. 
This does Atonement teach, and dem¬ 
onstrates the oneness of God's Son is unassailed by his belief he 
knows not what he is. 


w 139 L 10. 
Today accept Atonement, not to change reality, but 
merely to accept the truth about yourself, and go your way rejoicing 
in the endless Love of God. 
It is but this that we are asked to do. 
It 
is but this that we will do today. 
Five minutes in the morning and 
at night we will devote to dedicate our minds to our assignment for 
today. 
We start with this review of what our mission is: 

"I will accept Atonement for myself 


1301 


11-297 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


For I remain as God created me." 

w 139 L ll. 
We have not lost the knowledge that God gave to us 
when He created us like Him. 
We can remember it for everyone, for 
in creation are all minds as one, and in our memory is the recall how 
dear our brothers are to us in truth, how much a part of us is every 
mind, how faithful they have really been to us, and how our Father's 
Love contains us all. 


W 139 L 12. 
In thanks for all creation, in the Name of its Creator and 
His Oneness with all aspects of creation, we repeat our dedication to 
our cause today each hour, as we lay aside all thoughts which 
would distract us from our holy aim. 
For several minutes let your 
mind be cleared of all the foolish cobwebs which the world would 
weave around the holy Son of God 418 and learn the fragile nature of 
the chains which seem to keep the knowledge of yourself apart from 
your awareness, as you say: 

"I will accept Atonement for myself 

For I remain as God created me." W(307) 


418 For some reason the Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here. 



11-298 


1302 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 140 "Only salvation can be said to cure." 

W 140 L 1 . 
Cure is a word which cannot be applied to any remedy the 
world accepts as beneficial. 
What the world perceives as therapeu¬ 
tic is but what will make the body "better." When it tries to heal the 
mind, it sees no separation from the body where it thinks the mind 
exists. 
Its forms of healing thus must substitute illusion for illusion. 

One belief in sickness takes another form, and so the patient now 
perceives himself as well. 


w 140 L 2. 
He is not healed. 
He merely had a dream that he was sick, 
and in the dream he found a magic formula to make him well. 
Yet 
he has not awakened from the dream, and so his mind remains ex¬ 
actly as it was before. 
He has not seen the light that would awaken 
him and end the dream. 
What difference does the content of a 
dream make in reality? One either sleeps or wakens. 
There is noth¬ 
ing in between. 


w 140 L 3. 
The happy dreams the Holy Spirit brings are different 
from the dreams 419 of the world, where one can merely dream he is 
awake. 
The dreams forgiveness lets the mind perceive do not in¬ 
duce another form of sleep, so that the dreamer dreams another 
dream. 
His happy dreams are heralds of the dawn of truth upon the 
mind. 
They lead from sleep to gentle waking, so that dreams are 
gone. 
And thus they cure for all eternity. 


w 140 L 4. 
Atonement heals with certainty, and cures all sickness. 


For the mind which understands that sickness can be nothing but a 
dream is not deceived by forms the dream may take. 
Sickness 
where guilt is absent cannot come, for it is but another form of guilt. 

Atonement does not heal the sick, for that is not a cure. 
It takes 
away the guilt that makes the sickness possible. 
And that is cure 
indeed. 
For sickness now is gone, with nothing left to which it can 
return. 
W(308) 


419 Handwritten mark-up suggests (dreaming). 



1303 


11-299 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


w 140 L 5. 
Peace be to you who have been cured in God, and not in 
idle dreams . 
420 For cure must come from holiness, and holiness can 
not be found where sin is cherished. 
God abides in holy temples. 


He is barred where sin has entered. 
Yet there is no place where He 
is not. 
And therefore sin can have no home in which to hide from 
His beneficence. 


W 140 L 6. 
There is no place where holiness is not, and nowhere sin 
and sickness can abide. 
This is the thought that cures. 
It does not 
make distinctions among unrealities. 
Nor does it seek to heal what 
is not sick, unmindful where the need of for healing is. 
This is no 
magic. 
It is merely an appeal to truth, which cannot fail to heal and 
heal forever. 
It is not a thought which judges an illusion by its size, 
its seeming gravity, or anything that is related to the form it takes. 
It 
merely focuses on what it is, and knows that no illusion can be real. 

W 140 L 7. 
Let us not try today to seek to cure what cannot suffer 
sickness. 
Healing must be sought but where it is, and then applied 
to what is sick so that it can be cured. 
There is no remedy the world 
provides that can effect a change in anything. 
The mind that brings 
illusions to the truth is really changed. 
There is no change but this. 

For how can one illusion differ from another but in attributes which 
have no substance, no reality, no core, and nothing that is truly dif¬ 
ferent? 

w 140 L 8. 
Today we seek to change our minds about the source of 
sickness, for we seek a cure for all illusions, not another shift among 
them. 
We will try today to find the source of healing, which is in 
our minds because our Father placed it there for us. 
It is not further 
from us than ourselves. 
It is as near to us as our own thoughts, so 
close it is impossible to lose. 
We need but seek it and it must be 
found. 
W(309) 


420 John 20:19 Then, the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were 
shut where the disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and 
said to them, “Peace be with you.” 

John 20:21 So Jesus said to them again, “Peace to you! As the Father has sent Me, I also send you.” 
John 20:26 And after eight days His disciples were again inside, and Thomas with them. 
Jesus came, 
the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, “Peace to you!” 


11-300 


1304 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 140 L 9. 
We will not be misled today by what appears to us as sick. 

We go beyond appearances today, and reach the source of healing 
from which nothing is exempt. 
We will succeed to the extent to 
which we realize that there can never be a meaningful distinction 
made between what is untrue and equally untrue. 
Here there are no 
degrees, and no beliefs that what does not exist is truer in some 
forms than others. 
All of them are false, and can be cured because 
they are not true. 


W 140 L 10. 
So do we lay aside our amulets, our charms and medi¬ 
cines, our chants and bits of magic in whatever form they took . 
421 
We will be still and listen for the Voice of healing which will cure all 
ills as one, restoring saneness to the Son of God. 
No voice but This 
can cure. 
Today we hear a single Voice Which speaks to us of truth 
where all illusions end, and peace returns to the eternal quiet home 
of God. 


w 140 L ll. 
We waken hearing Him, and let Him speak to us five 
minutes as the day begins, and end the day by listening again five 
minutes more before we go to sleep. 
Our only preparation is to let 
our interfering thoughts be laid aside, not separately, but all of them 
as one. 
They are the same. 
We have no need to make them differ¬ 
ent, and thus delay the time when we can hear our Father speak to 
us. 
We hear Him now. 
We come to Him today. 


W 140 L 12. 
With nothing in our hands to which we cling, with lifted 
hearts and listening minds we pray: 

"Only salvation can be said to cure. 


Speak to us, Father, that we may be healed." 

And we will feel salvation cover us with soft protection, and with 
peace so deep that no illusion can disturb our minds, nor offer proof 
to us that it is real. 
This will we learn today. 
And we will say our 
prayer for healing hourly, and take a minute as the hour strikes to 
hear the answer to our prayer be given us as we attend in silence 
and in joy. 
W(310) This is the day when healing comes to us. 
This is 


4 1 Handwritten mark-up suggests (take). 



1305 


11-301 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


the day when separation ends, and we remember Who we really 
are. 
W(3ll) 


11-302 


PROOF 


1306 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Review 4 (W 140 R4) 

Introduction 

w 140 R4 l. 
Now a 422 review again, this time aware we are preparing 
for the second part of learning how the truth can be applied. 
Today 
we will begin to concentrate on readiness for what will follow next. 

Such is our aim for this review and for the lessons following. 
Thus 
we review the recent lessons and their central thoughts in such a 
way as will facilitate the readiness which we would now achieve. 


w 140 R4 2. 
There is a central theme that unifies each step in the re¬ 
view we undertake, which can be simply stated in these words: 

"My mind holds only what I think with God." 

This is a fact 423 and represents the truth of What you are and What 
your Father is. 
It is this Thought by Which the Father gave creation 
to the Son, establishing the Son as co-creator with Flimself. 
It is this 
Thought Which fully guarantees salvation to the Son, for in his 
mind no thoughts can dwell but those his Father shares. 
Lack of 
forgiveness blocks this Thought from his awareness. 
Yet It is for¬ 
ever true. 


W 140 R4 3. 
Let us begin our preparation with some understanding of 
the many forms in which the lack of true forgiveness may be care¬ 
fully concealed. 
Because they are illusions, they are not perceived to 
be but what they are; defenses which protect your unforgiving 
thoughts from being seen and recognized. 
Their purpose is to show 
you something else, and hold correction off through self-deceptions 
made to take its place. 


W 140 R4 4. 
And yet your mind holds only what you think with God. 

Your self-deceptions cannot take the place of truth. 
No more than 
can a child who throws a stick into the ocean change the coming and 
the going of the tides, the warming of the water by the sun, the sil¬ 
ver of the moon on it at night. 
So do we start each practice period in 


4 ’ Handwritten mark-up suggests (we). 


423 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here for some reason. 



1307 


11-303 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


this review with readying our minds to understand the lessons that 
we read, and see the meaning which they offer us. 
W(312) 

W 140 R4 5. 
Begin each day with time devoted to the preparation of 
your mind to learn what each idea you will review that day can of¬ 
fer you in freedom and in peace. 
Open your mind and clear it of all 
thoughts that would deceive, and let this Thought alone engage it 
fully and remove the rest: 

"My mind holds only what I think 424 with God." 

Five minutes with this Thought will be enough to set the day along 
the lines which God appointed, and to place His Mind in charge of 
all the thoughts you will receive that day. 
They will not come from 
you alone, for they will all be shared with Him. 
And so each one 
will bring the message of His Love to you, returning messages of 
yours to Him. 
So will communion with the Lord of Hosts be yours, 
as He Himself has willed it be. 
425 And as His Own completion joins 
with Him, so will He join with you who are complete as you unite 
with Him and He with you. 


w 140 R4 6. 
After your preparation, merely read each of the two ideas 
assigned to you to be reviewed that day. 
Then close your eyes and 
say them slowly to yourself. 
There is no hurry now, for you are us¬ 
ing time for its intended purpose. 
Let each word shine with the 
meaning God has given it as it was given to you through His Voice. 

Let each idea that you review that day give you the gift which He 
has laid in it for you to have of Him. 
And we will use no format for 
our practicing but this: 

W 140 R4 7. 
Each hour of the day bring to your mind the Thought 
with which the day began, and spend a quiet moment with It. 
Then 
repeat the two ideas you practice for the day unhurriedly, with time 


4 " 4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (think), which is probably correct. 
Typing has "hold”. 
The Notes has 
a glyph commonly associated with “think” and other “th” words, but not with “hold.” 

423 Psalm 46:7 The LORD of hosts is with us; The God of Jacob is our refuge. 


Romans 9:29 And as Isaiah said before, “Unless the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, we would have 
been as Sodom, and would have been like Gomorrah.” 

James 5:4 Behold, the hire of the laborers reaping your fields cry out, being kept back by you. 
And the 
cries of those who have reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts. 



11-304 


1308 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


enough to see the gifts which they contain for you, and let them be 
received where they were meant to be. 


w 140 R4 8. 
We add no other thoughts, but let them be the messages 
they are. 
We need no more than that 426 to give us happiness and 
rest and endless quiet, perfect certainty, and all our Father wills that 
we receive as the inheritance we have of Him. 
W(313) 

w 140 R4 9. 
Each day of practicing, as we review, we close as we be¬ 
gan, repeating first the Thought that made the day a special time of 
blessing and of happiness for us; and through our faithfulness re¬ 
stored the world from darkness to the light, from grief to joy, from 
pain to peace, from sin to holiness. 
God offers thanks to you who 
practice thus the keeping of His Word. 
And as you give your mind 
to the ideas for the day again before you sleep. 
His gratitude sur¬ 
rounds you in the peace wherein He wills you be forever, and are 
learning now to claim again as your inheritance. 
W(314) 


4 6 Handwritten mark-up suggests (this). 



1309 


11-305 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 141 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
( 121 - 122 ) 

w 141 L l. 
121) "Forgiveness is the key to happiness." 

W 141 L 2. 
122) "Forgiveness offers everything I want." 


11-306 


PROOF 


1310 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 142 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(123-124) 

W 142 L 1 . 
123) "I thank my Father for His gifts to me." 
w 142 L 2. 
124) "Let me remember I am one with God." 


PROOF 


1311 


COPY 


11-307 


Part 1 


Lesson 143 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(125-126) 

w 143 L l. 
125) "In quiet I receive God's Word today." 

W 143 L 2. 
126) "All that I give is given to myself." 


11-308 


PROOF 


1312 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 144 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(127-128) 

w 144 L l. 
127) "There is no love but God's." 

W 144 L 2. 
128) "The world I see has 427 nothing that I want." 


4 7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (holds). 



PROOF 


1313 


COPY 


11-309 



Part 1 


Lesson 145 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(129-130) 

W 145 L 1. 
129) "Beyond this world there is a world I want." 
w 145 L 2. 
130) "It is impossible to see two worlds." 


11-310 


PROOF 


1314 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 146 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(131-132) 

W 146 L 1 . 
131) "No-one can fail who asks to reach the truth." 
w 146 L 2. 
132) "I loose the world from all I thought it was." W(315) 


PROOF 1315 COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 147 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(133-134) 

w 147 L l. 
133) "I will not value what is valueless." 
w 147 L 2. 
134) "Let me perceive forgiveness as it is." 


11-312 


PROOF 


1316 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 148 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(135-136) 

w 148 L l. 
135) "If I defend myself I am attacked." 
w 148 L 2. 
136) "Sickness is a defense against the truth." 


PROOF 


1317 


COPY 


11-313 


Part 1 


Lesson 149 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(137-138) 

w 149 L l. 
137) "When I am healed I am not healed alone." 
w 149 L 2. 
138) "Heaven is the decision I must make." 


11-314 


PROOF 


1318 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 150 "My mind holds only what I think with God." 
(139-140) 

w 150 L l. 
139) "I will accept Atonement for myself." 
w 150 L 2. 
140) "Only salvation can be said to cure." W(316) 


PROOF 


1319 


COPY 


11-315 


Part 1 


Lesson 151 "All things are echoes of the Voice of God." 

W 151 L 1 . 
No-one can judge on partial evidence. 
That is not judg¬ 
ment. 
It is merely an opinion based on ignorance and doubt. 
Its 
seeming certainty is but a cloak for the uncertainty it would conceal. 

It needs irrational defense because it is irrational. 
And its defense 
seems strong, convincing, and without a doubt, because of all the 
doubting underneath. 


w 151L 2. 
You do not seem to doubt the world you see. 
You do not 
really question what is shown you through the body's eyes. 
Nor do 
you ask why you believe it, even though you learned a long while 
since your senses do deceive. 
That you believe them to the last de¬ 
tail which they report is even stranger when you pause to recollect 
how frequently they have been faulty witnesses indeed! Why 
would you trust them so implicitly? Why but because of underly¬ 
ing doubt which you would hide with show of certainty? 

W151L3. 
How can you judge? Your judgment rests upon the wit¬ 
ness that your senses offer you. 
Yet witness never falser was than 
this. 
But how else do you judge the world you see? You place pa¬ 
thetic faith in what your eyes and ears report. 
You think your fin¬ 
gers touch reality and close upon the truth. 
This is awareness which 
you understand, and think more real than what is witnessed to by 
the eternal Voice of God Himself. 


W151L4. 
Can this be judgment? You have often been urged to re¬ 
frain from judging, not because it is a right to be withheld from you. 

You cannot judge. 
You merely can believe the ego's judgments, all 
of which are false. 
It guides your senses carefully, to prove how 
weak you are; how helpless and afraid, how apprehensive of just 
punishment how black with sin, how wretched in your guilt. 
W(317) 
W 151 L 5. 
This thing it speaks of and would yet defend it tells you is 
yourself. 
And you believe that this is so with stubborn certainty. 


Yet underneath remains the hidden doubt that what it shows you as 
reality with such conviction it does not believe. 
It is itself alone that 


11-316 


1320 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


it condemns. 
It is within itself it sees the guilt. 
It is its own despair 
it sees in you. 


w 151L 6. 
Hear not its voice. 
The witnesses it sends to prove to you 
its evil is your own are false, and speak with certainty of what they 
do not know. 
Your faith in them is blind because you would not 
share the doubts their lord can not completely vanquish. 
You be¬ 
lieve to doubt his vassals is to doubt yourself, 
w 151L 7. 
Yet you must learn to doubt their evidence will clear the 
way to recognize yourself, and let the Voice for God alone be Judge 
of what is worthy of your own belief. 
He will not tell you that your 
brother should be judged by what your eyes behold in him, nor 
what his body's mouth says to your ears, nor what your fingers' 
touch reports of him. 
He passes by such idle witnesses, which 
merely bear false witness to God's Son. 
428 

W 151 L 8. 
He recognizes only what God loves, and in the holy light 
of what He sees do all the ego's dreams of what you are vanish be¬ 
fore the splendor He beholds. 
Let Him be Judge of what you are, 
for He has certainty in which there is no doubt because it rests on 
Certainty so great that doubt is meaningless before Its Face. 
Christ 
cannot doubt Himself. 
The Voice of God can only honor Him, re¬ 
joicing in His perfect, everlasting sinlessness. 


W 151 L 9. 
Whom He has judged can only laugh at guilt, unwilling 
now to play with toys of sin, unheeding of the body's witnesses be¬ 
fore the rapture of His 429 holy Face. 
W(318) And thus He judges you. 

Accept His word of what you are, for He bears witness to your 
beautiful creation and the Mind Whose Thought created your real¬ 
ity. 


W 151 L 10. 
What can the body mean to Him Who knows the glory of 
the Father and the Son? What whispers of the ego can He hear? 
What could convince Him that your sins are real? Let Him be Judge 


428 Exodus 20:16 You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor. 


Matthew 19:18 He said to Him, “Which ones?” Jesus said, “You shall not murder,” “You shall not 
commit adultery,” “You shall not steal,” “You shall not bear false witness,” 

429 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Christ's?). 



1321 


11-317 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


as well of everything that seems to happen to you in this world. 
His 
lessons will enable you to bridge the gap between illusions and the 
truth. 


w 151 L ll. 
He will remove all faith that you have placed in pain, 
disaster, suffering and loss. 
He gives you vision which can look be¬ 
yond these grim appearances, and can behold the gentle Face of 
Christ in all of them. 
You will no longer doubt that only good can 
come to you who are beloved of God, for He will judge all happen¬ 
ings and teach the single lesson which they all contain. 


w 151L 12. 
He will select the elements in them that represent the 
truth, and disregard those aspects which reflect but idle dreams. 

And He will reinterpret all you see, and all occurrences, each cir¬ 
cumstance, and every happening which seems to touch on you in 
any way from His one frame of reference, wholly unified and sure. 

And you will see the love beyond the hate, the constancy in change, 
the pure in sin, and only Heaven's blessing on the world. 


W 151 L 13. 
Such is your resurrection, for your life is not a part of 
anything you see. 
It stands beyond the body and the world, past 
every witness for unholiness, within the Holy, holy as Itself. 
430 In 
everyone and everything His Voice would speak to you of nothing 
but your Self and your Creator, Who is One with Him. 
So will you 
see the holy Face of Christ in everything, and hear in everything no 
sound except the echo of God's Voice. 
W(319) 

w 151L 14. 
We practice wordlessly today, except at the beginning of 
the time you 431 spend with God. 
We introduce these times with but 
a single, slow repeating of the thought with which the day begins. 

And then we watch our thoughts, appealing silently to Him Who 
sees the elements of truth in them. 
Let Him evaluate each thought 
that comes to mind, remove the elements of dreams, and give them 


430 Exodus 26:33 And you shall hang the veil from the clasps. 
Then you shall bring the Ark of the 
Covenant in there, behind the veil. 
The veil shall be a divider for you between the holy place and the 
Most Holy. 


431 Handwritten mark-up suggests (we). 



11-318 


1322 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


back to you 432 as clean ideas which do not contradict the Will of 


God. 



W 151 L 15. 
Give Him your thoughts, and He will give them back as 
miracles which joyously proclaim the wholeness and the happiness 
God wills His Son as proof of His eternal Love. 
And as each 
thought is thus transformed, it takes on healing power from the 
Mind Which saw the truth in it, and failed to be deceived by what 
was falsely added. 
All the threads of fantasy are gone, and what 
remains is unified into a perfect Thought that offers Its perfection 
everywhere. 


W 151 L 16. 
Spend fifteen minutes thus when you awake, and gladly 
give another fifteen more before you go to sleep. 
Your ministry be¬ 
gins as all your thoughts are purified. 
So are you taught to teach the 
Son of God the holy lesson of his sanctity. 
No-one can fail to listen 
when you hear the Voice of God give honor to God's Son. 
And eve¬ 
ryone will share the thoughts with you which He has retranslated in 
your mind. 


w 151L 17. 
Such is your Eastertide. 
And so you lay the gift of snow- 
white lilies on the world, replacing witnesses to sin and death. 

Through your transfiguration is the world redeemed and joyfully 
released from guilt . 
433 Now do we lift our resurrected minds in 

gladness and in gratitude to Him Who has restored our sanity to us. 

W(320) 

W 151 L 18. 
And we will hourly remember Him Who is salvation and 
deliverance. 
As we give thanks, the world unites with us, and hap¬ 
pily accepts our holy thoughts, which Heaven has corrected and 
made pure. 
Now has our ministry begun at last, to carry 'round the 
world the joyous news that truth has no illusions, and the peace of 
God, through us, belongs to everyone. 
W(32l) 


432 Handwritten mark-up suggests (again). 


433 Matthew 17:2 And He was transfigured before them. 
His face shone like the sun, and His clothes 
became as white as the light. 



1323 


11-319 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 152 "The power of decision is my own." 

w 152 L l. 
No-one can suffer loss unless it be his own decision. 
No- 
one suffers pain except his choice elects this state for him. 
No-one 
can grieve nor fear nor think him sick unless these are the outcomes 
that he wants, and no-one dies without his own consent. 
Nothing 
occurs but represents your wish, and nothing is omitted that you 
choose. 
Here is your world, complete in all details. 
Here is its 
whole reality for you. 
And it is only here salvation is. 


W 152 L 2. 
You may believe that this position is extreme, and too in¬ 
clusive to be true. 
Yet can truth have exceptions? If you have the 
gift of everything can loss be real? Can pain be part of peace, or 
grief of joy? Can fear and sickness enter in a mind where love and 
perfect holiness abide? 

w 152 L 3. 
Truth must be all-inclusive if it be the truth at all. 
Accept 
no opposite and no exceptions, for to do so is to contradict the truth 
entirely. 
Salvation is the recognition that the truth is true and noth¬ 
ing else is true. 
This you have heard before, but may not yet accept 
both parts of it. 
Without the first the second has no meaning, but 
without the second is the first no longer true. 
Truth cannot have an 
opposite. 
This can not be too often said and thought about. 
For if 
what is not true is true as well as what is true, then part of truth is 
false, and truth has lost its meaning. 
Nothing but the truth is true, 
and what is false is false. 


w 152 L 4. 
This is the simplest of distinctions, yet the most obscure. 

But not because it is a difficult distinction to perceive. 
It is con¬ 
cealed behind a vast array of choices which do not appear to be en¬ 
tirely your own. 
And thus the truth appears to have some aspects 
which belie consistency, but do not seem to be but contradictions 
introduced by you. 
W(322) 

w 152 L 5. 
As God created you, you must remain unchangeable with 
transitory states by definition false. 
And that includes all shifts in 
feeling, alterations in conditions of the body and the mind, in all 
awareness and in all response. 
This is the all-inclusiveness which 


11-320 


1324 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


sets the truth apart from falsehood, and the false kept separate from 
the truth as what it is. 


w 152 L 6. 
Is it not strange that you believe to think you made the 
world you see is arrogance? God made it not. 
Of this you can be 
sure. 
What can He know of the ephemeral, the sinful and the guilty, 
the afraid, the suffering and lonely, and the mind which lives within 
a body that must die? You but accuse Him of insanity to think He 
made a world where such things seem to have reality. 
He is not 
mad. 
Yet only madness makes a world like this. 


W 152 L 7. 
To think that God made chaos, contradicts His Will, in¬ 
vented opposites to truth, and suffers death to triumph over life, all 
this is arrogance. 
Humility would see at once these things are not of 
Him. 
And can you see what God created not? To think you can is 
merely to believe you can perceive what God willed not to be. 
And 
what could be more arrogant than this? 

w 152 L 8 . 
434 Let us today be truly humble, and accept what we have 
made as what it is. 
The power of decision is our own. 
Decide but to 
accept your rightful place as co-creator of the universe, and all you 
think you made will disappear. 
What rises to awareness then will 
be all that there ever was, eternally as it is now. 
And it will take the 
place of self deceptions made but to usurp the altar to the Father 
and the Son. 


w 152 L 9. 
Today we practice true humility, abandoning the false pre¬ 
tense by which the ego seeks to prove it arrogant. 
Only the ego can 
be arrogant. 
But truth is humble in acknowledging its mightiness, 
its changelessness and its eternal wholeness, all-encompassing, 

God's perfect gift to His beloved Son. 
W(323) We lay aside the arro¬ 
gance which says that we are sinners, guilty and afraid, ashamed of 
what we are. 
And lift our hearts in true humility instead to Him 
Who has created us immaculate, like to Himself in power and in 
love. 



4,4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Today). 



1325 


11-321 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 152 L 10. 
The power of decision is our own. 
And we accept of Him 
that which we are, and humbly recognize the Son of God. 
To recog¬ 
nize God's Son implies as well that all self-concepts have been laid 
aside and recognized as false. 
Their arrogance has been perceived. 

And in humility the radiance of God's Son, his gentleness, his per¬ 
fect sinlessness, his Father's love, his right to Heaven and release 
from hell, are joyously accepted as our own. 

w 152 L 11. 
Now do we join in glad acknowledgment that lies are 
false and only truth is true. 
We think of truth alone as we arise, and 
spend five minutes practicing its ways, encouraging our frightened 
minds with this: 

"The power of decision is my own. 


This day I will accept myself as what 

My Father's Will created me to be." 

Then will we wait in silence, giving up all self-deceptions as we 
humbly ask our Self that He reveal Himself to us. 
And He Who 
never left will come again to our awareness, grateful to restore His 
home to God as it was meant to be. 


W 152 L 12. 
In patience wait for Him throughout the day, and hourly 
invite Him with the words with which the day began, concluding it 
with this same invitation to your Self. 
God's Voice will answer, for 
He speaks for you and for your Father. 
He will substitute the peace 
of God for all your frantic thoughts, the truth of God for self- 
deceptions, and God's Son for your illusions of yourself. 
W(324) 


11-322 


1326 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 153 "In my defenselessness my safety lies." 

W 153 LI. 
You who feel threatened by this changing world, its twists 
of fortune and its bitter jests, its brief relationships and all the "gifts" 
it merely lends to take away again, attend this lesson well. 
The 
world provides no safety. 
It is rooted in attack, and all its "gifts" of 
seeming safety are illusory deceptions. 
It attacks and then attacks 
again. 
No peace of mind is possible where danger threatens thus. 


w 153 L 2. 
The world gives rise but to defensiveness. 
For threat 
brings anger, anger makes attack seem reasonable, honestly pro¬ 
voked, and righteous in the name of self-defense. 
Yet is defensive¬ 
ness a double threat. 
For it attests to weakness, and sets up a system 
of defense which cannot work. 
Now are the weak still further un¬ 
dermined, for there is treachery without and still a greater treachery 
within. 
The mind is now confused, and knows not where to turn to 
find escape from its imaginings. 


W 153 L 3. 
It is as if a circle held it fast, wherein another circle bound 
it, and another in that one, until escape no longer can be hoped for 
nor obtained. 
Attack, defense; defense, attack, become the circles of 
the hours and the days which bind the mind in heavy bands of steel 
with iron overlaid, returning but to start again. 
There seems to be 
no break nor ending in the ever-tightening grip of imprisonment 
upon the mind. 


w 153 L 4. 
Defenses are the costliest of all the prices which the ego 
would exact. 
In them lies madness in a form so grim that hope of 
sanity seems but to be an idle dream, beyond the possible. 
The 
sense of threat the world encourages is so much deeper and so far 
beyond the frenzy and intensity of which you can conceive that you 
have no idea of all the devastation it has wrought. 
You are it's 
slave. 
You know not what you do in fear of it . 
435 You do not under¬ 
stand how much you have been made to sacrifice who feel its iron 
grip upon your heart. 
W(325) 


435 Luke 23:34 Then Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.” 


1327 


11-323 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


w 153 L 5. 
You do not realize what you have done to sabotage the 
holy peace of God by your defensiveness. 
For you behold the Son of 
God as but a victim to attack by fantasies, by dreams, and by illu¬ 
sions he has made; yet helpless in their presence, needful only of 
defense by still more fantasies and dreams, by which illusions of his 
safety comfort him. 


w 153 L 6. 
Defenselessness is strength. 
It testifies to recognition of 
the Christ in you. 
Perhaps you will recall the course maintains that 
choice is always made between His 436 strength and your own weak¬ 
ness seen apart from Him. 
Defenselessness can never be attacked 
because it recognizes strength so great attack is folly, or a silly game 
a tired child might play when he becomes too sleepy to remember 
what he wants. 


w 153 L 7. 
Defensiveness is weakness. 
It proclaims you have denied 
the Christ and come to fear His Father's anger. 
What can save you 
now from your delusion of an angry god whose fearful image you 
believe you see at work in all the evils of the world? What but illu¬ 
sions could defend you now, when it is but illusions which you 
fight? 

W 153 L 8. 
We will not play such childish games today , 437 for our true 
purpose is to save the world, and we would not exchange for fool¬ 
ishness the endless joy our function offers us. 
We would not let our 
happiness slip by because a senseless fragment of a 438 dream hap¬ 
pened to cross our minds, and we mistook the figures in it for the 
Son of God; its tiny instant for eternity. 


w 153 L 9. 
We look past dreams today, and recognize that we need 
no defense because we are created unassailable, without all thought 
or wish or dream in which attack has any meaning. 
Now we cannot 


436 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Christ's(?)). 


2 Corinthians 12:9 And He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made perfect 
in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may 
rest upon me. 


437 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here, corrected by the handwriting to a comma. 
We 
agree with the correction. 


438 Handwritten mark-up moves (senseless) here. 



11-324 


1328 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


fear, for we have left all fearful thoughts behind. 
And in defense¬ 
lessness 439 we stand secure, serenely certain of our safety now, sure 
of salvation; sure we will fulfill our chosen purpose as our ministry 
extends its holy blessing through the world. 
W(326) 

W 153 L 10. 
Be still a moment, and in silence think how holy is your 
purpose, how secure you rest, untouchable within its light. 
God's 
ministers have chosen that the truth be with them. 
Who is holier 
than they? Who could be surer that his happiness is fully guaran¬ 
teed? And who could be more mightily protected? What defense 
could possibly be needed by the ones 440 who are among the chosen 
ones of God by His election and their own as well? 

w 153 L 11 . 
It is the function of God's ministers to help their brothers 
choose as they have done. 
God has elected all, but few have come to 
realize His Will is but their own . 
441 And while you fail to teach what 
you have learned salvation waits, and darkness holds the world in 
grim imprisonment. 
Nor will you learn that light has come to you, 
and your escape has been accomplished. 
For you will not see the 
light until you offer it to all your brothers. 
As they take it from your 
hands, so will you recognize it as your own. 


W 153 L 12. 
Salvation can be thought of as a game that happy chil¬ 
dren play. 
It was designed by One Who loves His children, and 
Who would replace their fearful toys with joyous games, which 
teach them that the game of fear is gone. 
His game instructs in hap¬ 
piness because there is no loser. 
Everyone who plays must win, and 
in his winning is the gain to everyone ensured. 
The game of fear is 
gladly laid aside when children come to see the benefits salvation 
brings. 


w 153 L 13. 
You who have played that you are lost to hope, aban¬ 
doned by your Father, left alone in terror in a fearful world made 
mad by sin and guilt, be happy now. 
That game is over. 
Now a 


439 Urtext manuscript has the word “defenceless” here. 
We agree with FIP and correct it to “defense- 
lessness”. 


440 Handwritten mark-up suggests (now by those). 


441 Matthew 20:16 “So the last will be first, and the first last. 
For many are called, but few chosen.” 


1329 

PROOF COPY 


11-325 



Part 1 


quiet time has come in which we put away the toys of guilt, and 
lock our quaint and childish thoughts of sin forever from the pure 
and holy minds of Heaven's children and the Son of God. 


w 153 L14. 
We pause but for a moment more, to play our final happy 
game upon this earth. 
And then we go to take our rightful place 
where truth abides and games are meaningless. 
W(327) 

So is the story ended. 
Let this day bring the last chapter closer to 
the world, that everyone may learn the tale 442 he reads of terrifying 
destiny, defeat of all his hopes, his pitiful defense against a venge¬ 
ance he can not escape, was 443 but his own deluded fantasy . 
444 God's 
ministers have come to waken him from the dark dreams this story 
has evoked in his confused, bewildered memory of this distorted 
tale. 
God's Son can smile at last, on learning that it is not true. 


W 153 L 15. 
Today we practice in a form we will maintain for quite a 
while. 
We will begin each day by giving our attention to the daily 
thought as long as possible. 
Five minutes now becomes the least we 
give to preparation for a day in which salvation is the only goal we 
have. 
Ten would be better; fifteen better still. 
And as distraction 
ceases to arise to turn us from our purpose, we will find that half an 
hour is too short a time to spend with God. 
Nor will we willingly 
give less at night in gratitude and joy. 


W 153 L 16. 
Each hour adds to our increasing peace, as we remember 
to be faithful to the Will we share with God. 
At times, perhaps, a 
minute, even less, will be the most that we can offer as the hour 
strikes. 
Sometimes we will forget. 
At other times the business of 
the world will close on us, and we will be unable to withdraw a little 
while and turn our thoughts to God. 


w 153 L 17. 
Yet when we can, we will observe our trust as ministers 
of God in hourly remembrance of our mission and His Love. 
And 
we will quietly sit by and wait on Him and listen to His Voice, and 


442 Handwritten mark-up suggests (s). 


443 Handwritten mark-up suggests (are). 


444 Handwritten mark-up suggests (fantasies). 



11-326 


1330 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


learn what He would have us do the hour that is yet to come; while 
thanking Him for the gifts He gave us in the one gone by. 
W(328) 
w 153 L 18. 
In time, with practice, you will never cease to think of 
Him, and hear His loving Voice guiding your footsteps into quiet 
ways, where you will walk in true defenselessness, for you will 
know that Heaven goes with you. 
Nor would you keep your mind 
away from Him a moment, even though your time is spent in offer¬ 
ing salvation to the world. 
Think you He will not make this possi¬ 
ble for you who chose to carry out His plan for the salvation of the 
world and yours? 

w 153 L 19. 
Today our theme is our defenselessness. 
We clothe our¬ 
selves in it as we prepare to meet the day. 
We rise up strong in 
Christ, and let our weakness disappear, as we remember that His 
strength abides in us . 
445 We will remind ourselves that He remains 
beside us through the day, and never leaves our weakness unsup¬ 
ported by His strength. 
We call upon His strength each time we feel 
the threat of our defenses undermine our certainty of purpose. 
We 
will pause a moment, as He tells us "I am here." 

W 153 L 20. 
Our 446 practicing will now begin to take the earnestness of 
love to help you keep your mind from wandering from its intent. 
Be 
not afraid nor timid . 
447 There can be no doubt that you will reach 
your final goal. 
The ministers of God can never fail, because the 
love and strength and peace that shine from them to all their broth¬ 
ers come from Him. 
These are His gifts to you. 
Defenselessness is 
all you need to give Him in return. 
You lay aside but what was 
never real, to look on Christ and see His sinlessness. 
W(329) 


445 1 John 3:24 And he who keeps His commandment dwells in Him, and He in him. 
And by this we 
know that He abides in us, by the Spirit which He gave to us. 


446 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Your). 


447 John 6:20 But He said to them, “It is I; do not be afraid.” 


1331 


11-327 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 154 "I am among the ministers of God." 

W 154 L 1 . 
Let us today be neither arrogant nor falsely humble. 
We 
have gone beyond such foolishness. 
We cannot judge ourselves, nor 
need we do so. 
These are but attempts to hold decision off, and to 
delay commitment to our function. 
It is not our part to judge our 
worth, nor can we know what role is best for us; what we can do 
within a larger plan we cannot see in its entirety. 
Our part is cast in 
Heaven, not in hell. 
And what we think is weakness can be 
strength; what we believe to be our strength is often arrogance, 
w 154 L 2. 
Whatever your appointed role may be it was selected by 
the Voice for God, Whose function is to speak for you as well. 
See¬ 
ing your strengths exactly as they are, and equally aware of where 
they can be best applied, for what, to whom and when. 
He chooses 
and accepts your part for you. 
He does not work without your own 
consent, but He is not deceived in what you are, and listens only to 
His Voice in you. 


w 154 L 3. 
It is through His ability to hear One 448 Voice which is His 
Own 449 that you become aware at last there is One 450 Voice in you. 

And that One 451 Voice appoints your function, and relays it to you, 
giving you the strength to understand it, do what it entails, and to 
succeed in everything you do that is related to it. 
God has joined 
His Son in this, and thus His Son becomes His messenger of unity 
with Him. 


W 154 L 4. 
It is this joining, through the Voice of God, of Father and 
of Son, that sets apart salvation from the world. 
It is this Voice 
which speaks of laws the world does not obey; Which promises sal¬ 
vation from all sin, with guilt abolished in the mind which God cre¬ 
ated sinless. 
Now this mind becomes aware again of Who created 


448 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


449 Handwritten mark-up suggests (own). 

430 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 

14 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 



11-328 


1332 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


it, and of His lasting union with itself. 
So is its Self the one Reality 452 
in Which its will and That of God are joined. 
W(330) 

w 154 L 5. 
A messenger does not elect to make the message he deliv¬ 
ers. 
Nor does he question the right of him who does, nor ask why 
he has chosen those who will receive the message that he brings. 
It 
is enough that he accept it, bring 453 it to the ones for which 454 it was 
appointed , 455 and fulfill his role in its delivery. 
If he insists on judg¬ 
ing 456 what the messages should be, or what their purpose is, or 
where they should be carried, he is failing to perform his proper 
part as bringer of the Word. 


w 154 L 6. 
There is one major difference in the role of Heaven's mes¬ 
sengers, which sets them off from those the world appoints. 
The 
messages which they deliver are intended first for them. 
And it is 
only as they can accept them for themselves that they become able 
to bring them further, and to give them everywhere that they were 
meant to be. 
Like earthly messengers, they did not write the mes¬ 
sages they bear, but they become their first receivers in the truest 
sense, receiving to prepare themselves to give, 
w 154 L 7. 
An earthly messenger fulfills his role by giving all the 
messages away. 
The messengers of God perform their part by their 
acceptance of His messages as for themselves, and show they un¬ 
derstand the messages by giving them away. 
They choose no roles 
that are not given them by His authority. 
And so they gain by every 
message which they give away. 


w 154 L 8. 
Would you receive the messages of God? For thus do you 
become His messengers. 
You are appointed now , 457 and yet you 
wait to give the messages you have received, and so you do not 
know that they are yours, and do not recognize them. 
No-one can 


452 Handwritten mark-up suggests (reality). 


453 Handwritten mark-up suggests (give). 


4,4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (whom). 


455 Handwritten mark-up suggests (is intended) 

456 Handwritten mark-up suggests (determines). 


The Urtext manuscript has a full sentence break, with handwriting changing it to a comma. 
We 
agree there should be no sentence break here. 



1333 


11-329 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


receive and understand he has received until he gives. 
For in the 
giving is his own acceptance of what he received. 
W(331) 

w 154 L 9. 
You who are now the messengers of God receive His mes¬ 
sages, for that is part of your appointed role. 
He 458 has not failed to 
offer what you need, nor has it been left unaccepted. 
Yet another 
part of your appointed task is yet to be accomplished. 
He Who has 
received for you the messages of God would have them be received 
by you as well. 
For thus do you identify with Him and claim your 
own. 


W 154 L 10. 
It is this joining that we undertake to recognize today. 


We will not seek to keep our minds apart from Him Who speaks for 
us, for it is but our voice we hear as we attend Him. 
He alone can 
speak to us and for us, joining in One Voice the getting and the giv¬ 
ing of God's Word; the giving and receiving of His Will. 


W 154 L 11. 
We practice giving Him what He would have, that we 
may recognize His gifts to us. 
He needs our voice that He may 
speak through us. 
He needs our hands to hold His messages, and 
carry them to those 459 He appoints. 
He needs our feet to bring us 
where He wills, that those who wait in misery may be at last deliv¬ 
ered. 
And He needs our will united with His Own, that we may be 
the true receivers of the gifts He gives. 


W 154 L 12. 
Let us but learn this lesson for today: we will not recog¬ 
nize what we receive until we give it. 
You have heard this said a 
hundred ways , 460 and yet belief is lacking still. 
But this is sure; until 
belief is given it, you will receive a thousand miracles and then re¬ 
ceive a thousand more, but will not know that God Himself has left 
no gift beyond what you already have; nor has denied the tiniest of 
blessings to His Son. 
What can this mean to you, until you have 
identified with him and with his own? W(332) 

W 154 L 13. 
Our lesson for today is stated thus: 


458 Handwritten mark-up suggests (God) 

434 Handwritten mark-up suggests (whom). 


460 Handwritten mark-up suggests (a hundred times). 



11-330 


1334 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


"I am among the ministers of God, 

And I am grateful that I have the means 
By which to recognize that I am free." 

The world recedes as we light up our minds, and realize these holy 
words are true. 
They are the message sent to us today from our 
Creator. 
Now we demonstrate how they have changed our minds 
about ourselves, and what our function is. 
For as we prove that we 
accept no will we do not share, our many gifts from our Creator will 
spring to our sight and leap into our hands, and we 461 recognize 
what we received. 
W(333) 


41,1 Handwritten mark-up suggests (will). 



1335 


11-331 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 155 "I will step back and let Him lead the way." 

W 155 L 1. 
There is a way of living in the world that is not here, al¬ 
though it seems to be . 
462 You do not change appearance, though you 
smile more frequently. 
Your forehead is serene; your eyes are quiet. 

And the ones who walk the world as you do recognize their own. 


Yet those who have not yet perceived the way will recognize you 
also, and believe that you are like them as you were before, 
w 155 L 2. 
The world is an illusion. 
Those who choose to come to it 
are seeking for a place where they can be illusions, and avoid their 
own Reality. 
Yet when they find their own Reality 463 is even here, 
then they step back and let It lead the way. 
What other choice is 
really theirs to make? To let illusion walk ahead of truth is mad¬ 
ness, but to let illusion sink behind the truth, and let the truth stand 
forth as what it is, is simple 464 sanity. 


W 155 L 3. 
This is the simple choice we make today. 
The mad illusion 
will remain awhile in evidence, for those to look upon who chose to 
come, and have not yet rejoiced to find they were mistaken in the 
choice. 
They cannot learn directly from the truth, because they 
have denied that it is so. 
And so they need a Teacher Who perceives 
their madness, but Who still can look beyond illusion to the simple 
truth in them. 


W 155 L 4. 
If truth demanded they give up the world, it would ap¬ 
pear to them as if it asked the sacrifice of something that is real. 

Many have chosen to renounce the world while still believing its 
reality, and they have suffered from a sense of loss and have not 
been released accordingly. 
Others have chosen nothing but the 
world, and they have suffered from a sense of loss still deeper, 
which they did not understand. 


w 155 L 5. 
Between these paths there is another road which leads 
away from loss of every kind, for sacrifice and deprivation both are 


462 John 17:16 “They are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.” 

463 Handwritten mark-up suggests (reality). 


464 Handwritten mark-up suggests (merely). 



11-332 


1336 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


quickly left behind. 
This is the way appointed for you now. 
You 
walk this path as others walk, nor do you seem to be distinct from 
them although you are indeed. 
Thus can you serve them while you 
serve yourself, and set their footsteps on the way W(334) which God 
has opened up to you, and them through you. 
465 
W 155 L 6. 
Illusion still appears to cling to you, that you may reach 
them. 
Yet it has stepped back, and it is not illusion that they hear 
you speak of, nor illusion which you bring their eyes to look on and 
their minds to grasp. 
Now can the truth, which walks ahead of you, 
speak to them through illusion, for the road leads past illusion now, 
while on the way you call to them that they may follow you. 


W 155 L 7. 
All roads will lead to this one in the end. 
For sacrifice and 
deprivation are paths which 466 lead nowhere, choices for defeat, and 
aims which will remain impossible. 
All this steps back as truth 
comes forth in you, to lead your brothers from the ways of death, 
and set them on the way to happiness. 
Their suffering is but illu¬ 
sion. 
Yet they need a guide to lead them out of it, for they mistake 
illusion for the truth. 


W 155 L 8. 
Such is salvation's call, and nothing more. 
It asks that you 
accept the truth, and let It go before you, lighting up the path of ran¬ 
som from illusion. 
It is not a ransom with a price. 
There is no cost, 
but only gain. 
Illusion can but seem to hold in chains the holy Son 
of God. 
It is but from illusions he is saved. 
As they step back he 
finds himself again. 


w 155 L 9. 
Walk safely now yet carefully, because this path is new to 
you. 
And you may find that you are tempted still to walk ahead of 
truth, and let illusion be your guide. 
Your holy brothers have been 


465 Isaiah 42:16 I will bring the blind by a way they did not know; 

I will lead them in paths they have not known. 


I will make darkness light before them, 

And crooked places straight. 


These things I will do for them, 

And not forsake them. 


Matthew 20:28 “Just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life a 
ransom for many.” 

466 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



1337 


11-333 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


given you to follow in your footsteps, as you walk with certainty of 
purpose to the truth. 
It goes before you now, that they may see 
something with which they can identify; something they understand 
to lead the way. 
W(335) 

w 155 L 10 . 
Yet at the journey's ending there will be no gap, no dis¬ 
tance between truth and you. 
And all illusions walking in the way 
you travelled will be gone from you as well, with nothing left to 
keep the truth apart from God's completion, holy as Himself. 
Step 
back in faith, and let truth lead the way. 
You know not where you 
go, but One Who knows goes with you. 
Let Him lead you with the 
rest. 


w 155 L 11 . 
When dreams are over, time has closed the door on all 
the things that pass and miracles are purposeless, the holy Son of 
God will make no journeys. 
There will be no wish to be illusion 
rather than the truth. 
And we step forth toward this, as we progress 
along the way that truth points out to us. 
This is our final journey, 
which we make for everyone. 
We must not lose our way. 
For as 
truth goes before us so it goes before our brothers, who will follow 
us. 


w 155 L 12. 
We walk to God. 
Pause and reflect on this. 
Could any 
way be holier, or more deserving of your effort, of your love, and of 
your full intent? What way could give you more than everything, or 
offer less and still content the holy Son of God? We walk to God. 

The truth that walks before us now is One 467 with Him, and leads us 
to where He has always been. 
What way but this could be a path 
which you would choose instead? 

w 155 L 13. 
Your feet are safely set upon the road which 468 leads the 
world to God. 
Look not to ways that seem to lead you elsewhere. 

Dreams are not a worthy guide for you who are God's Son. 
Forget 
not He has placed His hand in yours, and given you your brothers 
in His Trust that you are worthy of His Trust in you. 
He cannot be 


41,7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 

468 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



11-334 


1338 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


deceived. 
His Trust has made your pathway certain and your goal 
secure. 
You will not fail your brothers nor your Self. 
W(336) 

W 155 L 14. 
And now He asks but that you think of Him a while each 
day, that He may speak to you and tell you of His Love, reminding 
you how great His Trust; how limitless His Love. 
In your name and 
His Own, which are the same, we practice gladly with this thought 
today: 

"I will step back and let Him lead the way, 

For I woidd walk along the road to Him." W(337) 


-rn'iq 

PROOF COPY 


11-335 


Part 1 


Lesson 156 "I walk with God in perfect holiness." 

w 156 L l. 
Today's idea but states the simple truth which makes the 
thought of sin impossible. 
It promises there is no cause for guilt, 
and being causeless it does not exist. 
It follows surely from the basic 
thought so often mentioned in the text; ideas leave not their source. 

If this be true, how can you be apart from God? How could you 
walk the world alone and separate from your Source? 

W 156 L 2. 
We are not inconsistent in the thoughts that we present in 
our curriculum. 
Truth must be true throughout if it be true. 
It can¬ 
not contradict itself, nor be in parts uncertain and in others sure. 


You cannot walk the world apart from God because you could not 
be without Him. 
He is what your life is. 
Where you are He is. 
469 
There is One 470 life. 
That Life 471 you share with Him. 
Nothing can 
be apart from Him and live. 
472 

w 156 L 3. 
Yet where He is there must be holiness as well as life. 
No 
attribute of His remains unshared by everything that lives. 
What 
lives is holy as Himself because what shares His Life is part of Holi¬ 
ness, and could no more be sinful than the sun could choose to be of 
ice; the sea elect to be apart from water, or the grass to grow with 
roots suspended in the air. 


w 156 L 4. 
There is a Light in you Which cannot die. 
Whose Presence 
is so holy that the world is sanctified because of you. 
All things that 
live bring gifts to you, and offer them in gratitude and gladness at 
your feet. 
The scent of flowers is their gift to you. 
The waves bow 
down before you, and the trees extend their arms to shield you from 
the heat and lay their leaves before you on the ground, that you may 


469 John 14:3 “And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you to Myself; 
that where I am, there you may be also.” 

470 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


471 Handwritten mark-up suggests (life). 


472 Acts 17:28 for in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have 
said, “For we are also His offspring.” 


11-336 


1340 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


walk in softness, while the wind sinks to a whisper 'round 473 your 
holy head. 
W(338) 

W 156 L 5. 
The Light in you is what the universe longs to behold. 
All 
living things are still before you, for they recognize Who walks with 
you. 
The Light you carry is their own, and thus they see in you their 
holiness, saluting you as Savior and as God. 
Accept their reverence, 
for it is due to Holiness Itself Which walks with you, transforming 
in its gentle Light all things into Its likeness and Its purity. 
474 
w 156 L 6. 
This is the way salvation works. 
As you step back, the 
Light in you steps forward and encompasses the world. 
It heralds 
not the end of sin in punishment and death. 
In lightness and in 
laughter is it 475 gone, because its quaint absurdity is seen. 
It is a fool¬ 
ish thought, a silly dream, not frightening, ridiculous perhaps, but 
who would waste an instant in approach to God Himself for such a 
senseless whim? 

W 156 L 7. 
Yet you have wasted many, many years on just this foolish 
thought. 
The past is gone with all its fantasies. 
They keep you 
bound no longer. 
The approach to God is near. 
And in the little in¬ 
terval of doubt which still remains, you may perhaps lose sight of 
your Companion, and mistake Him for the senseless ancient dream 
that now is past. 


w 156 L 8. 
"Who walks with me?" This question should be asked a 
thousand times a day, 'til certainty has ended doubting and estab¬ 
lished peace. 
Today let doubting cease. 
God speaks for you in an¬ 
swering your question with these words: 

"I walk with God in perfect holiness. 


I light the world, I light my mind and all 

The minds which God created one with me ." W(339) 


473 The Urtext manuscript has this typed “around” with the “a” crossed out. 
The Notes has it just as 
“round” which spelling FIP also has. 
Since it is a contraction of “around” we insert the apostrophe 
making it ’round. 


474 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 


475 Handwritten mark-up suggests (sin). 



1341 


11-337 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 157 "Into His Presence would I enter now." 

w 157 L l. 
This is a day of silence and of trust. 
It is a special time of 
promise in your calendar of days. 
It is a time Heaven has set apart 
to shine upon, and cast a timeless light upon this day when echoes 
of eternity are heard. 
This day is holy, for it ushers in a new experi¬ 
ence, a different kind of feeling and awareness. 
You have spent 
long days and nights in celebrating death. 
Today you learn to feel 
the joy of life. 


W 157 L 2. 
This is another crucial turning point in the curriculum. 


We add a new dimension now; a fresh experience which sheds a 
light on all that we have learned already, and prepares us for what 
we have yet to learn. 
It brings us to the door where learning ceases, 
and we catch a glimpse of what lies past the highest reaches it can 
possibly attain. 
It leaves us there an instant and we go beyond it, 
sure of our direction and our only goal. 


w 157 L 3. 
Today it will be given you to feel a touch of Heaven, 
though you will return to paths of learning, yet you have come far 
enough along the way to alter time sufficiently to rise above its laws, 
and walk into eternity a while. 
This you will learn to do increas¬ 
ingly, as every lesson, faithfully rehearsed, brings you more swiftly 
to this holy place and leaves you, for a moment, to your Self. 


W 157 L 4. 
He will direct your practicing today, for what you ask for 
now is what He wills. 
And having joined your will with His this 
day, what you are asking must be given you. 
Nothing is needed but 
today's idea to light your mind, and let it rest in still anticipation 
and in quiet joy wherein you quickly leave the world behind. 
W(340) 

W 157 L 5. 
From this day forth your ministry takes on a genuine de¬ 
votion, and a glow that travels from your fingertips to those you 
touch, and blesses those you look upon. 
A vision reaches everyone 
you meet, and everyone you think of, or who thinks of you. 
For 
your experience today will so transform your mind that it becomes 
the touchstone for the holy Thoughts of God. 



11-338 


1342 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


w 157 L 6. 
Your body will be sanctified today, its only purpose being 
now to bring the vision of what you experience this day to light the 
world. 
We cannot give experience like this directly. 
Yet it leaves a 
vision in our eyes which we can offer everyone, that he may come 
the sooner to the same experience in which the world is quietly for¬ 
got, and Heaven is remembered for a while. 


w 157 L 7. 
As this experience increases and all goals but this become 
of little worth, the world to which you will return becomes a little 
closer to the end of time; a little more like Heaven in its ways; a little 
nearer its deliverance. 
And you who bring it light will come to see 
the light more sure; the vision more distinct. 
The time will come 
when you will not return in the same form in which you now ap¬ 
pear, for you will have no need of it. 
Yet now it has a purpose, and 
will serve it well. 


w 157 L 8. 
Today we will embark upon a course you have not 
dreamed of. 
But the Holy One, 476 the Giver of the happy dreams of 
life. 
Translator of perception into truth, the holy Guide to Heaven 
given you, has dreamed for you this journey, which you make and 
start today, with the experience, this day holds out to you to be your 
own. 


w 157 L 9. 
Into Christ's Presence will we enter now serenely unaware 
of everything except His shining Face and perfect Love. 
The vision 
of His Face will stay with you, but there will be an instant which 
transcends all vision, even this, the holiest. 
This you will never 
teach, for you attained it not through learning. 
Yet the vision speaks 
of your remembrance of what you knew that instant, and will surely 
know again. 
W(34l) 


476 Psalm 16:10 For You will not leave my soul in Sheol, Nor will You allow Your Holy One to see 
corruption. 


Mark 1:24 Saying, “Let us alone! What have we to do with You, Jesus of Nazareth? Did You come to 
destroy us? I know who You are—the Holy One of God!” 


1343 


11-339 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 158 "Today I learn to give as I receive." 

w 158 L l. 
What has been given you? The knowledge that you are a 
mind, in Mind and purely mind, sinless forever, wholly unafraid 
because you were created out of Love. 
Nor have you left your 
Source, remaining as you were created. 
This was given you as 
knowledge which you cannot lose. 
It was given as well to every 
living thing, for by that knowledge only does it live, 
w 158 L 2. 
You have received all this. 
No-one who walks the world 
but has received it. 
It is not this knowledge which you give, for that 
is what creation gave. 
All this cannot be learned. 
What, then, are 
you to learn to give today? Our 

lesson yesterday evoked a theme found early in the text. 
Experience 
cannot be shared directly in the way that vision can. 
The revelation 
that the Father and the Son are One will come in time to every mind. 

Yet is that time determined by the mind itself, not taught, 
w 158 L 3. 
Tire time is set already. 
It appears to be quite arbitrary. 


Yet there is no step along the road that anyone but takes 477 by 
chance. 
It has already been taken by him, although he has not yet 
embarked on it. 
For time but seems to go in one direction. 
We but 
undertake a journey that is over. 
Yet it seems to have a future still 
unknown to us. 


W 158 L 4. 
Time is a trick; a sleight of hand, a vast illusion in which 
figures come and go as if by magic. 
Yet there is a plan behind ap¬ 
pearances which does not change. 
The script is written. 
When ex¬ 
perience will come to end your doubting has been set. 
For we but 
see the journey from the point at which it ended, looking back on it, 
imagining we make it once again; reviewing mentally what has 
gone by. 
W(342) 

w 158 L 5. 
The 478 teacher does not give experience, because he did not 
learn it. 
It revealed itself to him at its appointed time. 
But vision is 
his gift. 
This he can give directly, for Christ's knowledge is not lost 


477 Handwritten mark-up suggests (but) should go here. 


478 Handwritten mark-up suggests (A). 



11-340 


1344 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


because He has a vision He can give to anyone who asks. 
The Fa¬ 
ther's Will and His are joined in knowledge. 
Yet there is a vision 
which the Holy Spirit sees because the mind of Christ beholds it too. 

W 158 L 6. 
Here is the joining of the world of doubt and shadows 
made with the intangible. 
Here is a quiet place within the world 
made holy by forgiveness and by love. 
Here are all contradictions 
reconciled, for here the journey ends. 
Experience, unlearned, un¬ 
taught, unseen, is merely there. 
This is beyond our goal, for it tran¬ 
scends what needs to be accomplished. 
Our concern is with Christ's 
vision. 
This we can attain. 


W 158 L 7. 
Christ's vision has one law. 
It does not look upon a body 
and mistake it for the Son whom God created. 
It beholds a light be¬ 
yond the body; an idea beyond what can be touched, a purity un¬ 
dimmed by errors, pitiful mistakes, and fearful thoughts of guilt 
from dreams of sin. 
It sees no separation. 
And it looks on everyone, 
on every circumstance, all happenings and all events, without the 
slightest fading of the light it sees. 


w 158 L 8. 
This can be taught, and must be taught by all who would 
achieve it. 
It requires but the recognition that the world can not give 
anything that faintly can compare with this in value; nor set up a 
goal which does not merely disappear when this has been per¬ 
ceived. 
And this you give today, see no-one as a body. 
Greet him as 
the Son of God he is, acknowledging that he is one with you in holi¬ 
ness. 
W(343) 

W 158 L 9. 
Thus are his sins forgiven him, for Christ has vision which 
has power to overlook them all. 
In His forgiveness they are gone. 

Unseen by One, they merely disappear, because a vision of the holi¬ 
ness which lies beyond them comes to take their place. 
It matters 
not what form they took, nor how enormous they appeared to be, 
nor who seemed to be hurt by them. 
They are no more, and all ef¬ 
fects they seemed to have are gone with them, undone and never to 
be done. 


w 158 L 10. 
Thus do you learn to give as you receive. 
And thus 
Christ's vision looks on you as well. 
This lesson is not difficult to 


1345 


11-341 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


learn, if you remember in your brother you but see yourself. 
If he be 
lost in sin so must you be; if you see light in him your sins have 
been forgiven by yourself. 
Each brother whom you meet today pro¬ 
vides another chance to let Christ's vision shine on you, and offer 
you the peace of God. 


W 158 L 11. 
It matters not when revelation comes, for that is not of 
time. 
Yet time has still one gift to give in which true knowledge is 
reflected in a way so accurate its image shares its unseen holiness; 479 
its likeness shines with its immortal Love. 
480 We practice seeing 
with the eyes of Christ today. 
And by the holy gifts we give, 

Christ's vision looks upon ourselves as well. 
W(344) 


479 Romans 8:29 For whom He foreknew, He also predestinated to be conformed to the image of His 
Son, for Him to be the First-born among many brothers. 


480 Handwritten mark-up suggests(love). 



11-342 


1346 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 159 "I give the miracles I have received." 

w 159 L l. 
No-one can give what he has not received. 
To give a thing 
requires first you have it in your own possession. 
Here the laws of 
Heaven and the world agree. 
But here they also separate. 
The 
world believes that to possess a thing it must be kept. 
Salvation 
teaches otherwise. 
To give is how to recognize you have received. 


It is the proof that what you have is yours. 


W 159 L 2. 
You understand that you are healed when you give heal¬ 
ing. 
You accept forgiveness as accomplished in yourself when you 
forgive. 
You recognize your brother as yourself, and thus do you 
perceive that you are whole. 
There is no miracle you cannot give, 
for all are given you. 
Receive them now by opening the storehouse 
of your mind where they are laid, and giving them away. 


W 159 L 3. 
Christ's vision is a miracle. 
It comes from far beyond it¬ 
self, for it reflects Eternal Love and the rebirth of love which never 
dies, but has been kept obscure. 
Christ's vision pictures Heaven, for 
it sees a world so like to Heaven that what God created perfect can 
be mirrored there. 
The darkened glass the world presents can show 
but twisted images in broken parts. 
481 The real world pictures 
Heaven's innocence. 


W 159 L 4. 
Christ's vision is the miracle in which all miracles are born. 

It is their source, remaining with each miracle you give, and yet re¬ 
maining yours. 
It is the bond by which the giver and receiver are 
united in extension here on earth as they are one in Heaven. 
Christ 
beholds no sin in anyone, and in His sight the sinless are as one. 

Their holiness was given by His Father and Himself. 
W(345) 

W 159 L 5. 
Christ's vision is the bridge between the worlds, and in its 
power can you safely trust to carry you from this world into one 
made holy by forgiveness. 
Things which seem quite solid here are 
merely shadows there, transparent, faintly seen, at times forgot, and 


4M 1 Corinthians 13:12 For now we see in a glass darkly, but then face to face. 
Now I know in part, but 
then I shall know just as I also am known. 



1347 


11-343 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


never able to obscure the light that shines beyond them. 
Holiness 
has been restored to vision, and the blind can see. 
482 
w 159 L 6. 
This is the Holy Spirit's single gift; the treasure house to 
which you can appeal with perfect certainty for everything that can 
contribute to your happiness. 
All are laid here already. 
All can be 
received but for the asking. 
Here the door is never locked, and no- 
one is denied his least request or his most urgent need. 
There is no 
sickness not already healed. 
No lack unsatisfied, no need unmet, 
within this golden treasury of Christ. 


w 159 L 7. 
Here does the world remember what was lost when it was 
made. 
For here it is repaired, made new again but in a different 
light. 
What was to be the home of sin becomes the center of re¬ 
demption and the hearth of mercy, where the suffering are healed 
and welcome. 
No-one will be turned away from this new home, 
where his salvation waits. 
No-one is stranger to him. 
No-one asks 
for anything of him except the gift of his acceptance of his welcom¬ 
ing 

W 159 L 8. 
Christ's vision is the holy ground in which the lilies of for¬ 
giveness set their roots. 
483 This is their home. 
They can be brought 
from here back to the world, but they can never grow in its unnour¬ 
ishing and shallow soil. 
They need the light and warmth and kindly 
care Christ's charity provides. 
They need the love with which He 
looks on them. 
And they become His messengers which give as 
they received. 
W(346) 

w 159 L 9. 
Take from His storehouse, that its treasures may increase. 

His lilies do not leave their home when they are carried back into 
the world. 
Their roots remain. 
They do not leave their source, but 
carry its beneficence with them, and turn the world into a garden 
like the one they came from, and to which they go again with added 
fragrance. 
Now are they twice blessed. 
The messages they brought 

482 Luke 4:18 “The Spirit of the Lord is on Me; because of this He has anointed Me to proclaim the 
Gospel to the poor. 
He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to proclaim deliverance to the captives, 
and new sight to the blind, to set at liberty those having been crushed,” 

483 Exodus 3:5 Then He said, “Do not draw near this place. 
Take your sandals off your feet, for the 
place where you stand is holy ground.” 


11-344 


1348 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


from Christ have been delivered and returned to them. 
And they 
return them gladly unto Him. 


w 159 L 10. 
Behold the store of miracles set out for you to give. 
Are 
you not worth the gift, when God appointed it be given you? Judge 
not God's Son, but follow in the way He has established. 
Christ has 
dreamed the dream of a forgiven world. 
It is His gift whereby a 
sweet transition can be made from death to life, from hopelessness 
to hope. 
Let us an instant dream with Him. 
His dream awakens us 
to truth. 
His vision gives the means for a return to our unlost and 
everlasting sanctity in God. 
W(347) 


1349 


11-345 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 160 "I am at home. 
Fear is the stranger here." 

w 160 L1. 
Fear is a stranger to the ways of love. 
Identify with fear, 
and you will be a stranger to yourself. 
And thus you are unknown 
to you. 
What is your Self remains an alien to the part of you which 
thinks that it is real but different from yourself. 
Who could be sane 
in such a circumstance? Who but a madman could believe he is 
what he is not, and judge against himself? 

W 160 L 2. 
There is a stranger in our midst, who comes from an idea 
so foreign to the truth he speaks a different language, looks upon a 
world truth does not know, and understands what truth regards as 
senseless. 
Stranger yet, he does not recognize to whom he comes, 
and yet maintains his home belongs to him while he is alien now 
who is at home. 
And yet how easy it would be to say, "This is my 
home. 
Here I belong, and will not leave because a madman says I 
must." 

w 160 L 3. 
What reason is there for not saying this? What could the 
reason be except that you had asked this stranger in to take your 
place, and let you be a stranger to yourself? No-one would let him¬ 
self be dispossessed so needlessly unless he thought there was an¬ 
other home more suited to his tastes. 


w 160 L 4. 
Who is the stranger? Is it fear or you that is unsuited to 
the home which God provided for His Son? Is fear His Own, cre¬ 
ated in His likeness? 484 Is it fear that love completes and is com¬ 
pleted by? There is no home can shelter love and fear. 
They cannot 
coexist. 
If you are real, then fear must be illusion. 
And if fear is 
real, then you do not exist at all. 
W(348) 

W 160 L 5. 
How simply, then, the question is resolved. 
Who fears has 
but denied himself and said, "I am the stranger here. 
And so I leave 
my home to one more like me than myself, and give him all I 
thought belonged to me." Now is he exiled of necessity, not know- 

484 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 



11-346 


1350 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


ing who he is, uncertain of all things but this; that he is not himself, 
and that his home has been denied to him. 

w 160 L 6. 
What does he search for now? What can he find? A 
stranger to himself can find no home wherever he may look, for he 
has made return impossible. 
485 His way is lost except a miracle will 
search him out, and show him that he is no stranger now. 
The mira¬ 
cle will come. 
For in his home his Self remains. 
It asked no stranger 
in, and took no alien thought to be Itself. 
And It will call Its Own 486 
unto Itself, in recognition of what is Its Own. 


w 160 L 7. 
Who is the stranger? Is he not the one your Self calls not? 
You are unable now to recognize this stranger in your midst, for you 
have given him your rightful place. 
Yet is your Self as certain of Its 
Own as God is of His Son. 
He cannot be confused about creation. 


He is sure of what belongs to Him. 
No stranger can be interposed 
between His knowledge and His Son's reality. 
He does not know of 
strangers. 
He is certain of His Son. 


w 160 L 8. 
His 487 certainty suffices. 
Who he knows to be His Son be¬ 
longs where He has set His Son forever. 
He has answered you who 
ask, "Who is the stranger?" Hear His Voice assure you, quietly and 
sure, that you are not a stranger to your Father, nor is your Creator 
stranger made to you. 
Whom God has joined remains forever one, 
at home in Him, no stranger to Himself. 
488 

w 160 L 9. 
Today we offer thanks that Christ has come to search the 
world for what belongs to Him. 
His vision sees no strangers, but 
beholds His Own, and joyously unites with them. 
They see Him as 
a stranger, for they do not recognize themselves. 
Yet as they give 
Him welcome they remember. 
And He leads them gently home 
again where they belong. 
W(349) 


' John 10:5 “And they will not follow a stranger, but will flee from him, for they do not know the 
voice of strangers.” 

486 Three instances of “Own” on this page, and one on the previous page are rendered lower case “own” 
by handwritten strokes. 


487 Handwritten mark-up suggests (God's). 


488 Matthew 19:6 “So then, they are no longer two but one flesh. 
Therefore what God has joined to¬ 
gether, let not man separate.” 


1351 


11-347 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


w 160 L 10. 
Not one does He 489 forget. 
Not one He fails to give you to 
remember, that your home may be complete and perfect as it was 
established. 
He has not forgotten you. 
But you will not remember 
Him until you look on all as He does. 
Who denies his brother is de¬ 
nying Him, 490 and thus refusing to accept the gift of sight by which 
his Self is clearly recognized, his home remembered, and salvation 
come. 
W(350) 


489 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Christ). 


490 Matthew 25:45 Then He will answer them, saying, “Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as you did 
not do it to one of the least of these, you did not do it to Me.” 


11-348 


1352 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 161 "Give me your blessing, holy Son of God." 

W 161 L 1 . 
Today we practice differently, and take a stand against our 
anger, that our fears may disappear and offer room to love. 
Here is 
salvation in the simple words in which we practice with today's 
idea. 
Here is the answer to temptation which can never fail to wel¬ 
come in the Christ where fear and anger had prevailed before. 
Here 
is Atonement made complete, the world passed safely by and 
Heaven now restored. 
Here is the Answer of the Voice of God. 


W 161 L 2. 
Complete abstraction is the natural condition of the mind. 

But part of it is now unnatural. 
It does not look on everything as 
one. 
It sees instead but fragments of the whole, for only thus could 
it invent the partial world you see. 
The purpose of all seeing is to 
show you what you wish to see. 
All hearing but brings to your 
mind the sounds it wants to hear. 


w 161L 3. 
Thus were specifics made. 
And now it is specifics we 
must use in practicing. 
We give them to the Holy Spirit that He may 
employ them for a purpose which is different from the one we gave 
to them. 
Yet He can use but what we made to teach us from a dif¬ 
ferent point of view, so we can see a different use in everything. 


W 161 L 4. 
One brother is all brothers. 
Every mind contains all 
minds, for every mind is one. 
Such is the truth. 
Yet do these 
thoughts make clear the meaning of creation? Do these words bring 
perfect clarity with them to you? What can they seem to be but 
empty sounds, pretty, perhaps; correct in sentiment, yet fundamen¬ 
tally not understood nor understandable. 
The mind that taught it¬ 
self to think specifically can no longer grasp abstraction in the sense 
that it is all-encompassing. 
We need to see a little that we learn a 
lot. 
W(351) 

w 161 L 5. 
It seems to be the body we 491 feel limits our 492 freedom, 
makes us 493 suffer and at last puts out our 494 life. 
Yet bodies are 

41,1 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


492 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 


493 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 


494 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your). 



1353 


11-349 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


but 495 symbols of a 496 concrete form 497 of fear. 
Fear without symbols 
calls for no response, for symbols can stand for the meaningless. 
498 
Love needs no symbols, being true. 
But fear attaches to specifics, 
being false. 


w 161L 6. 
Bodies attack, but minds do not. 
This thought is surely 
reminiscent of our text, where it is often emphasized. 
This is the 
reason bodies easily become fear's symbols. 
You have many times 
been urged to look beyond the body, for its sight presents the sym¬ 
bol of love's "enemy" Christ's vision does not see. 
The body is the 
target for attack, for no-one thinks he hates a mind. 
Yet what but 
mind directs the body to attack? What else could be the seat of fear 
except what thinks of fear? 

w 161L 7. 
Hate is specific. 
There must be a thing to be attacked. 
An 
enemy must be perceived in such a form he can be touched and seen 
and heard, and ultimately killed. 
When hatred rests upon a thing, it 
calls for death as surely as God's Voice proclaims there is no death. 

Fear is insatiable, consuming everything its eyes behold; seeing itself 
in everything; compelled to turn upon itself and to destroy. 


w 161L 8. 
Who sees a brother as a body sees him as fear's symbol. 

And he will attack because what he beholds is his own fear external 
to himself, poised to attack, and howling to unite with him again. 

Mistake not the intensity of rage projected fear must spawn. 
It 
shrieks in wrath, and claws the air in frantic hope it can reach to its 
maker and devour him. 


w 161L 9. 
This do the body's eyes behold in one whom Heaven cher¬ 
ishes, the angels love, and God created perfect. 
This is his reality. 

And in Christ's vision is his loveliness reflected in a form so holy 
and so beautiful that you could scarce refrain from kneeling at his 
feet. 
Yet you will take his hand instead, for you are like him in the 
sight which sees him thus. 
W(352) Attack on him is enemy to you, for 

195 Handwritten mark-up suggests (concrete). 


4,6 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 


1:7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (s). 


498 The Urtext manuscript has “meanings” here but both the Notes and FIP have “meaningless” which 
appears to be more correct. 



11-350 


1354 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


you will not perceive that in his hands is your salvation. 
Ask him 
but for this, and he will give it to you. 
Ask him not to symbolize 
your fear. 
Would you request that love destroy itself? Or would 
you have it be revealed to you and set you free? 

W 161 L 10. 
Today we practice in a form we have attempted earlier. 

Your readiness is closer now, and you will come today nearer 
Christ's vision. 
If you are intent on reaching it, you will succeed to¬ 
day. 
And once you have succeeded, you will not be willing to ac¬ 
cept the witnesses your body's eyes call forth. 
What you will see 
will sing to you of ancient melodies you will remember. 
You are not 
forgot in Heaven. 
Would you not remember it? 
w 161L 11 . 
Select one brother, symbol of the rest, and ask salvation 
of him. 
See him first as clearly as you can, in that same form to 
which you are accustomed. 
See his face, his hands and feet, his 
clothing. 
Watch him smile, and see familiar gestures which he 
makes so frequently. 
Then think of this; what you are seeing now 
conceals from you the sight of one who can forgive you all your 
sins; whose sacred hands can take the nails which pierce your own 
away, and lift the crown of thorns which you have placed upon 
your bleeding head. 
499 Ask this of him that he may set you free: 

"Give me your blessing, holy Son of God, 

I would behold you with the eyes of Christ, 

And see my perfect sinlessness in you." 

W 161 L 12. 
And He will answer Whom you called upon, for He will 
hear the Voice of God in you, and answer in your own. 
Behold him 
now whom you had seen as merely flesh and bone, and recognize 
that Christ has come to you. 
Today's idea is your safe escape from 
anger and from fear. 
Be sure you use it instantly, should you be 
tempted to attack a brother and perceive in him the symbol of your 


459 Mathew 9:6 “But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins, 
then He said to the paralytic, Arise, take up your bed and go to your house.” 

John 20:25 The other disciples therefore said to him, “We have seen the Lord.” 

So he said to them, “Unless I see in His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of 
the nails, and put my hand into His side, I will not believe.” 


1355 


11-351 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


fear. 
And you will see him suddenly transformed from enemy to 
Savior; from the devil into Christ. 
W(353) 500 W(354) 


500 In no edition does any material appear between lessons 161 and 162, yet there is a skipped page 
number in the Urtext manuscript. 



11-352 


1356 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 162 "I am as God created me." 

W 162 L 1 . 
This single thought, held firmly in the mind, would save 
the world. 
From time to time we will repeat it, as we reach another 
stage in learning. 
It will mean far more to you as you advance. 


These words are sacred, for they are the words God gave in answer 
to the world you made. 
By them it disappears, and all things seen 
within its misty clouds and vaporous illusions vanish as these 
words are spoken. 
For they come from God. 

w 162 L 2. 
Here is the Word by which the Son became His Father's 
happiness. 
His Love, and His completion. 
Here creation is pro¬ 
claimed, and honored as it is. 
There is no dream these words will 
not dispel; no thought of sin and no illusion that the dream contains 
that 501 will not fade away before their might. 
They are the trumpet 
of awakening that sounds around the world. 
502 The dead awake in 
answer to its call. 
And those who live and hear this sound will 
never look on death. 
503 

w 162 L 3. 
Holy indeed is he who makes these words his own; arising 
with them in his mind, recalling them throughout the day, at night 
bringing them with him as he goes to sleep. 
His dreams are happy 
and his rest secure; his safety certain and his body healed, because 
he sleeps and wakens with the truth before him always. 
He will 
save the world because he gives the world what he receives each 
time he practices the words of truth. 


w 162 L 4. 
Today we practice simply. 
For the words we use are 
mighty, and they need no thoughts beyond themselves to change 


501 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 


502 Joel 2:1 Blow the trumpet in Zion, 

And sound an alarm in My holy mountain! 

Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble; 

For the day of the LORD is coming, 

For it is at hand: 

1 Corinthians 15:52 In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. 
For the trumpet will 

sound, and the dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. 


r ’ 03 John 8:51 Most assuredly, I say to you, if anyone keeps My word he shall never see death. 


John 11:25 Jesus said to her, “I am the resurrection and the life. 
He who believes in Me, though he may 
die, he shall live.” 

John 11:26 “And whoever lives and believes in Me shall never die. 
Do you believe this?” 


1357 


11-353 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


the mind of him who uses them. 
So wholly is it changed that it is 
now the treasury in which God places all His gifts and all His Love 
to be distributed to all the world, increased in giving; kept complete 
because its sharing is unlimited. 
And thus you learn to think with 
God. 
Christ's vision has restored your sight by salvaging your 
mind. 
W(355) 

w 162 L 5. 
We honor you today. 
Yours is the right to perfect holiness 
you now accept. 
With this acceptance is salvation brought to every¬ 
one, for who could cherish sin when holiness like this has blessed 
the world? Who could despair when perfect joy is yours, available 
to all as remedy for grief and misery, all sense of loss, and for com¬ 
plete escape from sin and guilt? 

w 162 L 6. 
And who would not be brother to you now; you, his re¬ 
deemer and his Savior? Who could fail to welcome you into his 
heart with loving invitation, eager to unite with one like him in ho¬ 
liness? You are as God created you. 
These words dispel the night, 
and darkness is no more. 
The light is come today to bless the world, 
for you have recognized the Son of God, and in your recognition is 
the world's. 
W(356) 


11-354 


1358 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 163 "There is no death. 
The Son of God is free." 

W 163 L 1. 
Death is a thought which takes on many forms, often un¬ 
recognized. 
It may appear as sadness, fear, anxiety or doubt; as an¬ 
ger, faithlessness and lack of trust; concern for bodies, envy, and all 
forms in which the wish to be as you are not may come to tempt 
you. 
All such thoughts are but reflections of the worshipping of 
death as Savior and as giver of release. 


W 163 L 2. 
Embodiment of fear, the host of sin, god of the guilty and 
the lord of all illusions and deceptions, does the thought of death 
seem mighty. 
For it seems to hold all living things within its with¬ 
ered hand; all hopes and wishes in its blighting grasp; all goals per¬ 
ceived but in its sightless eyes. 
The frail, the helpless and the sick 
bow down before its image, thinking it alone is real, inevitable, wor¬ 
thy of their trust. 
For it alone will surely come. 


W 163 L 3. 
All things but death are seen to be unsure, too quickly lost 
however hard to gain, uncertain in their outcome, apt to fail the 
hopes they once engendered, and to leave the taste of dust and 
ashes in their wake in place of aspirations and of dreams. 
But death 
is counted on. 
For it will come with certain footsteps when the time 
has come for its arrival. 
It will never fail to take all life as hostage to 
itself. 


W 163 L 4. 
Would you bow down to idols such as this? Here is the 
strength and might of God Himself perceived within an idol made 
of dust. 
Here is the opposite of God proclaimed as lord of all crea¬ 
tion, stronger than God's Will for life, the endlessness of love and 
Heaven's perfect, changeless constancy. 
Here is the Will of Father 
and of Son defeated finally, and laid to rest beneath the headstone 
death has placed upon the body of the holy Son of God. 
W(357) 
w 163 L 5. 
Unholy in defeat, he has become what death would have 
him be. 
His epitaph, which death itself has written, gives no name 
to him, for he has passed to dust. 
It says but this: "Here lies a wit¬ 
ness God is dead." And this it writes again and still again, while all 


1359 


11-355 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


the while its worshippers agree, and kneeling down with foreheads 
to the ground, they whisper fearfully that it is so. 


W 163 L 6. 
It is impossible to worship death in any form, and still se¬ 
lect a few you would not cherish, and would yet avoid while still 
believing in the rest. 
For death is total. 
Either all things die, or else 
they live and cannot die. 
No compromise is possible. 
For here 
again we see an obvious position which we must accept if we be 
sane; what contradicts one thought entirely can not be true unless its 
opposite is proven false. 


w 163 L 7. 
The idea of the death of God is so preposterous that even 
the insane have difficulty in believing it. 
For it implies that God was 
once alive and somehow perished, killed, apparently, by those who 
did not want him to survive. 
Their stronger will could triumph over 
His, and so Eternal Fife gave way to death. 
And with the Father 
died the Son as well. 


w 163 L 8. 
Death's worshippers may be afraid. 
And yet can thoughts 
like these be fearful? If they saw that it is only this which they be¬ 
lieved, they would be instantly released. 
And you will show them 
this today. 
There is no death, and we renounce it now in every 
form, for their salvation and our own as well. 
504 God made not 
death. 
Whatever form it takes must therefore be illusion. 
This the 
stand we take today. 
And it is given us to look past death and see 
the life 505 beyond. 


w 163 L 9. 
"Our Father, bless our eyes today. 
YJe are Your messengers, 
and we would look upon the glorious reflection of Your Love which 
shines in everything. 
We live and breathe in You alone. 
506 We are not 


504 Isaiah 25:8 He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord Jehovah will wipe away tears from 
all faces. 
And He shall take away from all the earth the rebuke of His people. 
For Jehovah has spoken. 


1 Corinthians 15:55 O death, where is your sting? O grave, where is your victory?” 

2 Timothy 1:10 But has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abol¬ 
ished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel, 

Revelation 21:4 And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes; there shall be no more death, nor 
sorrow, nor crying. 
There shall be no more pain, for the former things have passed away.” 

505 The Urtext manuscript has “light” originally typed, with “life” handwritten in as a correction. 
The 
Notes has “life” which appears to be correct. 


306 Acts 17:28 for in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have 
said, “For we are also His offspring.” 


11-356 


1360 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


separate from Your Eternal Life. 
There is no death, for death is not 
Your Will. 
And we abide where You have placed us, in the Life we 
share with You and with all living things, to be W(358) like You and 
part of You forever. 
We accept Your Thoughts as ours, and our will is 
One with Yours eternally. 
Amen." W(359) 


1361 


11-357 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 164 "Now are we One 507 with Him Who is our 
Source." 

w 164 L l. 
What time but now can truth be recognized? The present 
is the only time there is. 
And so today, this instant, now, we come 
to look upon what is forever there; not in our sight but in the eyes of 
Christ. 
He looks past time and sees eternity as represented there. 


He hears the sounds the senseless busy world engenders, yet He 
hears them faintly, for beyond them all He hears the song of Heaven 
and the Voice of God more clear, more meaningful, more near. 


w 164 L 2. 
The world fades easily away before His sight. 
Its sounds 
grow dim. 
A melody from far beyond the world increasingly is 
more and more distinct; an ancient Call to Which He gives an an¬ 
cient answer. 
You will recognize them both. 
For they are but your 
answer to your Father's Call to you. 
Christ answers for you, echoing 
your Self, using your voice to give His glad consent; accepting your 
deliverance for you. 


w 164 L 3. 
How holy is your practicing today, as He 508 gives you His 
sight and hears for you, and answers in your name the Call He 
hears. 
How quiet is the time you give to spend with Him beyond 
the world. 
How easily are all your seeming sins forgot and all your 
sorrows unremembered. 
On this day is grief laid by, for sights and 
sounds which come from nearer than the world are 509 clear to you 
who will today accept the gifts He gives. 


W 164 L 4. 
There is a silence into which the world can not intrude. 

There is an ancient peace you carry in your heart and have not lost. 

There is a sense of holiness in you the thought of sin has never 
touched. 
All this today you will remember. 
Faithfulness in practic¬ 
ing today will bring rewards so great and so completely different 


307 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


308 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Christ). 


309 Handwritten mark-up suggests(are) but original Urtext manuscript has “made”. 
The handwritten 
option is the grammatically correct so has been chosen. 
However, “are made” may have been the 
underlying original. 
FIP has “are clear” while the Notes has it does the Urtext “made clear.” 


11-358 


1362 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


from all things you sought before, that you will know that here your 
treasure is, and here your rest. 
W(360) 

W 164 L 5. 
This is the day when vain imaginings part like a curtain, to 
reveal what lies beyond them. 
Here 510 is what is really there made 
visible, while all the shadows which appeared to hide it sink to ob¬ 
scurity. 
511 Now is the balance righted, and the scales 512 of judgment 
left to Him Who judges true. 
And in His judgment will a world un¬ 
fold in perfect innocence before your eyes. 
Now will you see it with 
the eyes of Christ. 
Now is its transformation clear to you. 

w 164 L 6. 
Brothers, this day is sacred to the world. 
Your vision, 
given you from far beyond all things within the world looks back on 
them in a new light. 
And what you see becomes the healing and 
salvation of the world. 
The valuable and valueless are both per¬ 
ceived and recognized for what they are. 
And what is worthy of 
your love receives your love, while nothing to be feared remains. 


W 164 L 7. 
We will not judge today. 
We will receive but what is 
given us from Judgment made beyond the world. 
Our practicing 
today becomes our gift of thankfulness for our release from blind¬ 
ness and from misery. 
All that we see will but increase our joy, be¬ 
cause its holiness reflects our own. 
We stand forgiven in the sight of 
Christ, with all the world forgiven in our own. 
We bless the world 
as we behold it in the light in which our Savior looks on us, and of¬ 
fer it the freedom given us through His forgiving vision, now our 
own. 


W 164 L 8. 
Open the curtain in your practicing by merely letting go 
all things you think you want. 
Your trifling treasures put away, and 
leave a clean and open space within your mind where Christ can 
come, and offer you the treasure of salvation. 
He has need of your 
most holy mind to save the world. 
Is not this purpose worthy to be 


510 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Now). 


511 Handwritten mark-up suggests (merely sink away). 

312 Handwritten mark-up suggests (scale). 



1363 


11-359 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


yours? Is not Christ's vision worthy 513 to be sought above the 
world's unsatisfying goals? 

W 164 L 9. 
Let not today slip by without the gifts it holds for you re¬ 
ceiving your consent and your acceptance. 
We can change the 
world if you acknowledge them. 
You may not see the value your 
acceptance gives the world. 
But this you surely want; you can ex¬ 
change all suffering for joy this very day. 
W(361) Practice in earnest 
and the gift is yours. 
Would God deceive you? Can His promise 
fail? Can you withhold so little when His Hand holds out complete 
salvation to His Son? W(362) 


513 The Urtext manuscript has “worthy” handwritten in. 
It is present in the Notes so we include it. 



11-360 


1364 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 165 "Let not my mind deny the Thought of God." 

w 165 L l. 
What makes this world seem real except your own denial 
of the truth which lies beyond? What but your thoughts of misery 
and death obscure the perfect happiness and the Eternal Life your 
Father wills for you? And what could hide what cannot be con¬ 
cealed except illusion? What could keep from you what you already 
have, except your choice to see it not, denying it is there? 
w 165 L 2. 
The Thought of God created you. 
It left you not, nor have 
you ever been apart from It an instant. 
It belongs to you. 
By It you 
live. 
It is your Source of life, holding you one 514 with It, and every¬ 
thing is one with you because It left you not. 
The Thought of God 
protects you, cares for you, makes soft your resting place and 
smooth your way, lighting your mind with happiness and love. 

Eternity and Everlasting Life shine in your mind because the 
Thought of God has left you not, and still abides with you. 

w 165 L 3. 
Who would deny his safety and his peace, his joy, his heal¬ 
ing and his peace of mind, his quiet rest, his calm awakening, if he 
but recognized where they abide? Would he not instantly prepare 
to go where they are found, abandoning all else as worthless in 
comparison with them? And having found them, would he not 
make sure they stay with him and he remains with them? 

W 165 L 4. 
Deny not Heaven. 
It is yours today but for the asking. 


Nor need you perceive how great the gift, how changed your mind 
will be, before it comes to you. 
Ask to receive and it is given you. 

Conviction lies within it. 
'Til you welcome it as yours uncertainty 
remains. 
Yet God is fair. 
Sureness is not required to receive what 
only your acceptance can bestow. 
W(363) 

w 165 L 5. 
Ask with desire. 
You need not be sure that you request 
the only thing you want. 
But when you have received, you will be 
sure you have the treasure you have always sought. 
What would 
you then exchange it for? What would induce you now to let it fade 


514 Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed (One), handwriting suggests lower case which we think is 
correct since “One” is not a reference to the deity. 



1365 


11-361 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


away from your ecstatic vision? For this sight proves that you have 
exchanged your blindness for the seeing eyes of Christ; your mind 
has come to lay aside denial and accept the Thought of God as its 
inheritance. 


w 165 L 6. 
Now is all doubting past, the journey's end made certain 
and salvation given you. 
Now is Christ's power in your mind to 
heal as you were healed. 
For now you are among the Saviors of the 
world. 
Your destiny lies there and nowhere else. 
Would God con¬ 
sent to let Flis Son remain forever starved by his denial of the nour¬ 
ishment he needs to live? Abundance dwells in him, and depriva¬ 
tion cannot cut him off from God's sustaining 515 Love and from his 
home. 


w 165 L 7. 
Practice today in hope. 
For hope indeed is justified. 
Your 
doubts are meaningless, for God is certain. 
And the Thought of 
Him is never absent. 
Sureness must abide within you who are host 
to Him. 
This course removes all doubts which you have interposed 
between Him and your certainty of Him. 
We count on Him and not 
upon ourselves to give us certainty. 
And in His Name we practice 
as His Word directs we do. 
His sureness lies beyond our every 
doubt. 
His Love remains beyond our every fear. 
The Thought of 
Him is still beyond all dreams, and in our minds according to His 
Will. 
W(364) 


515 The Urtext manuscript is typed “sustained” and changed by handwriting to “sustaining” which is 
what is in the Notes. 



11-362 


1366 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 166 "I am entrusted with the gifts of God." 

W 166 L 1 . 
All things are given you. 
God's trust in you is limitless. 


He knows His Son. 
He gives without exception, holding nothing 
back that can contribute to your happiness. 
And yet, unless your 
will is one with His, His gifts are not received. 
But what would 
make you think there is another will than His? 
w 166 L 2. 
Here is the paradox that underlies the making of the 
world. 
This world is not the Will of God, and so it is not real. 
Yet 
those who think it real must still believe there is another will, and 
one which leads to opposite effects from those He wills. 
Impossible 
indeed; but every mind which looks upon the world and judges it as 
certain, solid, trustworthy and trued believes in two creators; or in 
one, himself alone. 
But never in One 516 God. 


w 166 L 3. 
The gifts of God are not acceptable to anyone who holds 
such strange beliefs. 
He must believe that to accept God's gifts, 
however evident they may become, however urgently he may be 
called to claim them as his own, is being pressed to treachery 
against himself. 
He must deny their presence, contradict the truth, 
and suffer to preserve the world he made. 


w 166 L 4. 
Here is the only home he thinks he knows. 
Here is the 
only safety he believes that he can find. 
Without the world he made 
is he an outcast, homeless and afraid. 
He does not realize that it is 
here he is afraid indeed, and homeless too; an outcast wandering so 
far from home, so long away, he does not realize he has forgotten 
where he came from, where he goes, and even who he really is. 


w 166 L 5. 
Yet in his lonely, senseless wanderings God's gifts go with 
him, all unknown to him. 
He cannot lose them. 
But he will not look 
at what is given him. 
He wanders on, aware of the futility he sees 
about him everywhere, perceiving how his little lot but dwindles as 
he goes ahead to nowhere. 
Still he wanders on in misery and pov¬ 
erty, alone though God is with him, and a treasure his so great that 


316 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 



1367 


11-363 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


everything the world contains is valueless before its magnitude. 

W(365) 

W 166 L 6. 
He seems a sorry figure, weary, worn, in threadbare cloth¬ 
ing, and with feet that bleed a little from the rocky road he walks. 

No-one but has identified with him, for everyone who comes here 
has pursued the path he follows, and has felt defeat and hopeless¬ 
ness as he is feeling them. 
Yet is he really tragic when you see that 
he is following the way he chose, and need but realize Who walks 
with him, and open up his treasures to be free? 

w 166 L 7. 
This is your chosen self, the one you made as a replace¬ 
ment for reality. 
This is the self you savagely defend against all rea¬ 
son, every evidence, and all the witnesses with proof to show this is 
not you. 
You heed them not. 
You go on your appointed way, with 
eyes cast down lest you might catch a glimpse of truth, and be re¬ 
leased from self deception and set free. 


w 166 L 8. 
You cower fearfully lest you should feel Christ's touch 
upon your shoulder, and perceive His gentle hand directing you to 
look upon your gifts. 
How could you then proclaim your poverty in 
exile? He would make you laugh at this perception of yourself. 

Where is self-pity then? And what becomes of all the tragedy you 
sought to make for him whom God intended only joy? 

W 166 L 9. 
Your ancient fear has come upon you now, and justice 517 
has caught up with you at last. 
Christ's hand has touched your 
shoulder, and you feel that you are not alone. 
You even think the 
miserable self you thought was you may not be your identity. 
Per¬ 
haps God's Word is truer than your own. 
Perhaps His gifts to you 
are real. 
Perhaps He has not wholly been outwitted by your plan to 
keep His Son in deep oblivion, and go the way you chose without 
your Self. 
W(366) 

w 166 L 10. 
God’s Will does not oppose. 
It merely is. 
It is not God 
you have imprisoned in. 
your plan to lose your Self. 
He does not 
know about a plan so alien to His Will. 
There was a need He did 


317 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Justice). 



11-364 


1368 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


not understand, to which He gave an Answer. 
That is all. 
And you 
who have this Answer given you have need no more of anything 
but this. 


W 166 L 11. 
Now do we live, for now we cannot die. 
The wish for 
death is answered, and the sight that looked upon it now has been 
replaced by vision which perceives that you are not what you pre¬ 
tend to be. 
One walks with you Who gently answers all your fears 
with this one merciful reply, "It is not so." He points to all the gifts 
you have each time the thought of poverty oppresses you, and 
speaks of His Companionship when you perceive yourself as lonely 
and afraid. 


W 166 L 12. 
Yet He reminds you still of one thing more you had for¬ 
gotten. 
For His touch on you has made you like Himself. 
The gifts 
you have are not for you alone. 
What He has come to offer you, you 
now must learn to give. 
This is the lesson that His giving holds, for 
He has saved you from the solitude you sought to make, in which to 
hide from God. 
He has reminded you of all the gifts that God has 
given you. 
He speaks as well of what becomes your will when you 
accept these gifts, and recognize they are your own. 

w 166 L 13. 
The gifts are yours, entrusted to your care, to give to all 
who chose the lonely road you have escaped. 
They do not under¬ 
stand they but pursue their wishes. 
It is you who teach them now. 

For you have learned of Christ there is another way for them to 
walk. 
Teach them by showing them the happiness that comes to 
those who feel the touch of Christ and recognize God's gifts. 
Let 
sorrow not tempt you to be unfaithful to your trust. 
W(367) 
w 166 L 14. 
Your sighs will now betray the hopes of those who look 
to you for their release. 
Your tears are theirs. 
If you are sick you but 
withhold their healing. 
What you fear but teaches them their fears 
are justified. 
Your hand becomes the giver of Christ's touch; your 
change of mind becomes the proof that who accepts God's gifts can 
never suffer anything. 
You are entrusted with the world's release 
from pain. 



1369 


11-365 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


W 166 L 15. 
Betray it not. 
Become the living proof of what Christ's 
touch can offer everyone. 
God has entrusted all His gifts to you. 
Be 
witness in your happiness to how transformed the mind becomes 
which chooses to accept His gifts and feel the touch of Christ. 
Such 
is your mission now. 
For God entrusts the giving of His gifts to all 
who have received them. 
He has shared His joy with you. 
And 
now you go to share it with the world. 
W(368) 


11-366 


1370 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 167 "There is one life, and that I share with God." 

w 167 L l. 
There are not different kinds of life, for life is like the 
truth. 
It does not have degrees. 
It is the one condition in which all 
that God created share. 
Like all His Thoughts, it has no opposite. 

There is no death because what God created shares His Life. 
There 
is no death because an opposite to God does not exist. 
There is no 
death because the Father and the Son are One. 
518 
w 167 L 2. 
In this world there appears to be a state that is life's oppo¬ 
site. 
You 519 call it death. 
Yet we have learned that the idea of death 
takes many forms. 
It is the one idea which underlies all feelings that 
are not supremely happy. 
It is the alarm to which you give response 
of any kind that is not perfect joy. 
All sorrow, loss, anxiety and suf¬ 
fering and pain, even a little sigh of weariness, a slight discomfort or 
the merest frown, acknowledge death. 
And thus deny you live. 


W 167 L 3. 
You think that death is of the body. 
Yet it is but an idea, 
irrelevant to what is seen as physical. 
A thought is in the mind. 
It 
can be then applied as mind directs it. 
But its origin is where it must 
be changed, if change occurs. 
Ideas leave not their source. 
The em¬ 
phasis this course has placed on that idea is due to its centrality in 
our attempts to change your mind about yourself. 
It is the reason 
you can heal. 
It is the cause of healing. 
It is why you cannot die. 
Its 
truth established you as one with God. 


w 167 L 4. 
Death is the thought that you are separate from your Crea¬ 
tor. 
It is the belief conditions change, emotions alternate because of 
causes you cannot control, you did not make, and you can never 
change. 
It is the fixed belief ideas can leave their source, and take on 
qualities the source does not contain, becoming different from their 

own origin, apart from it in kind as well as distance, time, and form. 

W(369) 

W 167 L 5. 
Death cannot come from life. 
Ideas remain united to their 
source. 
They can extend all that their source contains. 
In that they 


518 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


19 Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed “We” it is overstock and replaced with (You). 



1371 


11-367 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


can go far beyond themselves. 
But they can not give birth to what 
was never given them. 
As they are made, so will their making be. 


As they were born, so will they then give birth. 
And where they 
come from, there will they return. 


W 167 L 6. 
The mind can think it sleeps, but that is all. 
It cannot 
change what is its waking state. 
It cannot make a body, nor abide 
within a body. 
What is alien to the mind does not exist, because it 
has no source. 
For mind creates all things that are, and cannot give 
them attributes it lacks, nor change its own eternal, mindful state. 
It 
cannot make the physical. 
What seems to die is but the sign of mind 
asleep. 


W 167 L 7. 
Tire opposite of life can only be another form of life. 
As 
such, it can be reconciled with what created it, because it is not op¬ 
posite in truth. 
Its form may change; it may appear to be what it is 
not. 
Yet mind is mind awake or sleeping. 
It is not its opposite in 
anything created, nor in what it seems to make when it believes it 
sleeps. 


w 167 L 8. 
God creates only mind awake. 
He does not sleep, and His 
creations cannot share what He gives not, nor make conditions 
which He does not share with them. 
The thought of death is not the 
opposite to thoughts of life. 
Forever unopposed by opposites of any 
kind, the Thoughts of God remain forever changeless, with the 
power to extend forever changelessly but yet within Themselves, for 
They are everywhere. 


w 167 L 9. 
What seems to be the opposite of life is merely sleeping. 

When the mind elects to be what it is not, and to assume an alien 
power which it does not have, a foreign state it cannot enter, or a 
false condition not within its Source, it merely seems to go to sleep a 
while. 
It dreams of time; an interval in which what seems to happen 
never has occurred, the changes wrought are substanceless, and all 
events are nowhere. 
When the mind awakes, it but continues as it 
always was. 
W(370) 

W 167 L 10. 
Let us today be children of the truth, and not deny our 
holy heritage. 
Our life is not as we imagine it. 
Who changes life be- 


11-368 


1372 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


cause he shuts his eyes, or makes himself what he is not because he 
sleeps and sees in dreams an opposite to what he is? We will not 
ask for death in any form today. 
Nor will we let imagined opposites 
to life abide even an instant where the Thought of Life Eternal has 
been set by God Himself. 


w 167 L 11. 
His holy home we strive to keep today as He established 
it, and wills it be forever and forever. 
He is Lord of what we think 
today. 
And in His Thoughts, Which have no opposite, we under¬ 
stand there is one life, and that we share with Him; with all creation, 
with their thoughts as well, whom He created in a Unity of life 
which cannot separate in death and leave the Source of Life from 
where It came. 


w 167 L 12. 
We share our life because we have one Source, a Source 
from Which perfection comes to us, remaining always in the holy 
minds which He created perfect. 
As we were, so are we now and 
will forever be . 
520 A sleeping mind must waken as it sees its own 
perfection mirroring the Lord of Life so perfectly it fades into what 
is reflected there. 
And now it is no more a mere reflection. 
It be¬ 
comes the thing reflected, and the light which makes reflection pos¬ 
sible. 
No vision now is needed. 
For the wakened mind is one that 
knows its Source, its Self, its Holiness. 
W(37l) 


5:0 Hebrews 13:8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever. 


The wording here is reminiscent of the Gloria Patri or Minor Doxology commonly used in Christian 
luturgy: “ Glory be to the Father, and to the Son and to the Holy Ghost/Spirit. 
As it was in the begin¬ 
ning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. 
Amen .” The Greek original is of great aniquity, 
possibly the first century. 



1373 


11-369 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 168 "Your grace is given me. 
I claim it now." 

w 168 L1. 
God speaks to us. 
Shall we not speak to Him? He is not 
distant. 
He makes no attempt to hide from us. 
We try to hide from 
Him, and suffer from deception. 
He remains entirely accessible. 
He 
loves His Son. 
There is no certainty but this, yet this suffices. 
He 
will love His Son forever. 
When his mind remains asleep. 
He loves 
him still. 
And when his mind awakes. 
He loves him with a never- 
changing Love . 
521 

W 168 L 2. 
If you but knew the meaning of His Love, hope and de¬ 
spair would be impossible, for hope would be forever satisfied; de¬ 
spair of any kind unthinkable. 
His grace His answer is to all de¬ 
spair, for in it lies remembrance of His Love. 
Would He not gladly 
give the means by which His Will is recognized? His grace is yours 
by your acknowledgment. 
And memory of Him awakens in the 
mind which asks the means of Him whereby its sleep is done, 
w 168 L 3. 
Today we ask of God the gift He has most carefully pre¬ 
served within our hearts, waiting to be acknowledged. 
This the gift 
by which God leans to us and lifts us up, taking salvation's final step 
Himself. 
All steps but this we learn, instructed by His Voice. 
But 
finally He comes Himself and takes us in His arms, and sweeps 
away the cobwebs of our sleep. 
His gift of grace is more than just an 
answer. 
It restores all memories the sleeping mind forgot; all cer¬ 
tainty of what love's meaning is. 


w 168 L 4. 
God loves His Son. 
Request Him now to give the means 
by which this world will disappear, and vision first will come, with 
knowledge but an instant later. 
For in grace you see a light that 
covers all the world in love, and watch fear disappear from every 
face as hearts rise up and claim the light as theirs. 
What now re- 


Jeremiah 31:3 

The LORD has appeared of old to me, saying: 
“Yes, I have loved you with an everlasting love; 
Therefore with lovingkindness I have drawn you.” 


11-370 


1374 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


mains that Heaven be delayed an instant longer? What remains 522 
undone when your forgiveness rests on everything? W(372) 
w 168 L 5. 
It is a new and holy day today, for we receive what has 
been given us. 
Our faith lies in the Giver, not our own acceptance. 

We acknowledge our mistakes, but He to Whom all error is un¬ 
known is yet the One Who answers our mistakes by giving us the 
means to lay them down, and rise to Him in gratitude and love. 


w 168 L 6. 
And He descends to meet us as we come to Him , 523 for 
what he has prepared for us He gives and we receive. 
Such is His 
Will because He loves His Son. 
To Him we pray today, returning 
but the words He gave to us through His Own Voice, His Word, His 
Love: 

"Your grace is given me. 
I claim it now. 


Father, I come to You. 
And You will come 

To me who asks. 
I am the Son You love." W(373) 


3 1 Handwritten mark-up suggests (is still) in place of “remains”. 

323 Handwritten mark-up suggests a sentence break at this point. 



1375 


11-371 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 169 "By grace I live. 
By grace I am released." 

w 169 L1. 
Grace is an aspect of the Love of God which is most like 
the state prevailing in the Unity of truth. 
It is the world's most lofty 
aspiration, for it leads beyond the world entirely. 
It is past learning 
yet the goal of learning, for grace cannot come until the mind pre¬ 
pares itself for true acceptance. 
Grace becomes inevitable instantly 
in those who have prepared a table where it can be gently laid and 
willingly received; an altar clean and holy for the gift, 
w 169 L 2. 
Grace is acceptance of the Love of God within a world of 
seeming hate and fear. 
By grace alone the hate and fear are gone, 
for grace presents a state so opposite to everything the world con¬ 
tains that those whose minds are lighted by the gift of grace can not 
believe the world of fear is real. 


w 169 L 3. 
Grace is not learned. 
The final step must go beyond all 
learning. 
Grace is not the goal this course aspires to attain. 
Yet we 
prepare for grace in that an open mind can hear the Call to waken. 


It is not shut tight against God's Voice. 
It has become aware that 
there are things it does not know, and thus is ready to accept a state 
completely different from experience with which it is familiarly at 
home. 


w 169 L 4. 
We have perhaps appeared to contradict our statement 
that the revelation of the Father and the Son as One 524 has been al¬ 
ready set. 
But we have also said the mind determines when that 
time will be, and has determined it. 
And yet we urge you to bear 
witness to the Word of God to hasten the experience of truth, and 
speed its advent into every mind which recognizes its effects on 
you . 
525 W(374) 

w 169 L 5. 
Oneness is simply the idea God is. 
And in His Being He 
encompasses all things. 
No mind holds anything but Him. 
We say 
"God is," and then we cease to speak, for in that knowledge words 


524 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


525 John 1:7-8 This man came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all through him might 
believe. 
He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. 



11-372 


1376 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


are meaningless. 
There are no lips to speak them, and no part of 
mind sufficiently distinct to feel that it is now aware of something 
not itself. 
It has united with its Source, and like the Source Itself, it 
merely is. 


W 169 L 6. 
We cannot speak nor write nor even think of this at all. 
It 
comes to every mind when total recognition that its will is God's has 
been completely given and received completely. 
It returns the mind 
into the endless present, where the past and future cannot be con¬ 
ceived. 
It lies beyond salvation; past all thought of time, forgive¬ 
ness, and the holy Face of Christ. 
The Son of God has merely disap¬ 
peared into His Father, as His Father has in Him. 
The world has 
never been at all. 
Eternity remains a constant state. 


w 169 L 7. 
This is beyond the 526 experience we try to hasten. 
Yet for¬ 
giveness, taught and learned, brings with it the experiences which 
bear witness that the time the mind itself determined to abandon all 
but this is now at hand . 
527 We do not hasten it, in that what you will 
offer was concealed from Him Who teaches what forgiveness 
means. 


W 169 L 8. 
All learning was already in His Mind, accomplished and 
complete. 
He recognized all that time holds and gave it to all 
minds, that each one might determine, from a point where time has 
ended, when it is released to revelation and eternity. 
We have re¬ 
peated several times before that you but make a journey that is 
done. 


W 169 L 9. 
For Oneness must be here. 
Whatever time the mind has 
set for revelation is entirely irrelevant to what must be a constant 
state, forever as it always was; forever to remain as it is now. 
We 
merely take the part assigned long since, and fully recognized as 
perfectly fulfilled by Him Who wrote salvation's script in His Crea¬ 
tor's Name, and in the Name of His Creator's Son. 
W(375) 


526 We have added the word “the” in order to make the sentence make sense. 
It is not present in any 
other version we consulted. 


327 Matthew 4:17 From that time Jesus began to preach and to say, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven 
is at hand.” 


1377 


11-373 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W 169 L 10. 
There is no need to further clarify what no-one in the 
world can understand. 
When revelation of your Oneness comes, it 
will be known and fully understood. 
Now we have work to do, for 
those in time can speak of things beyond, and listen to words which 
explain what is to come is past already. 
Yet what meaning can the 
words convey to those who count the hours still, and rise and work 
and go to sleep by them? 

w 169 L 11 . 
Suffice it, then, that you have work to do to play your 
part. 
The ending must remain obscure to you until your part is 
done. 
It does not matter. 
For your part is still what all the rest de¬ 
pends on. 
As you take the role assigned to you, salvation comes a 
little nearer each uncertain heart that does not beat as yet in tune 
with God. 
Forgiveness is the central theme which runs throughout 
salvation, holding all its parts in meaningful relationships, the 
course it runs directed, and its outcome sure. 


w 169 L 12. 
And now we ask for grace, the final gift salvation can be¬ 
stow. 
Experience that grace provides will end in time, for grace 
foreshadows Fieaven yet does not replace the thought of time but 
for a little while. 
The interval suffices. 
It is here that miracles are 
laid; to be returned by you from holy instants you receive, through 
grace, in your experience, to all who see the light that lingers on 
your face. 


w 169 L13. 
What is the Face of Christ but his who went a moment 
into timelessness, and brought a clear reflection of the Unity he felt 
an instant back to bless the world? Flow could you finally attain to 
it forever, while a part of you remains outside, unknowing, un¬ 
awakened and in need of you as witness to the truth? W(376) 

W 169 L 14. 
Be grateful to return, as you were glad to go an instant 
and accept the gifts which grace provided you. 
You carry them 
back to yourself. 
And revelation stands not far behind. 
Its coming 
is ensured. 
We ask for grace and for experience that comes from 
grace. 
We welcome the release it offers everyone. 
We do not ask for 
the unaskable. 
We do not look beyond what grace can give. 
For 
this we can give in the grace that has been given us. 



11-374 


1378 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


w 169 L 15. 
Our learning goal today does not exceed this prayer, yet 
in the world what could be more than what we ask this day of Him 
Who gives the grace we ask, as it was given Him? 

"By grace I live. 
By grace I am released. 


By grace I give. 
By grace I will release." W(377) 

Lesson 170 "There is no cruelty in God and none in me." 

W 170 L 1 . 
No-one attacks without intent to hurt. 
This can have no 
exception. 
When you think that you attack in self-defense, you 
mean that to be cruel is protection; you are safe because of cruelty. 

You mean that you believe to hurt another brings you freedom. 


And you mean that to attack is to exchange the state in which you 
are for something better, safer, more secure from dangerous inva¬ 
sion and from fear. 


W 170 L 2. 
How thoroughly insane is the idea that to defend from 
fear is to attack! For here is fear begot and fed with blood, to make 
it grow and swell and rage. 
And thus is fear protected, not escaped. 

Today we learn a lesson which can save you more delay and need¬ 
less misery than you can possibly imagine. 
It is this: 

You make what you defend against, and by 
your own defense against it is it real 
and inescapable. 
Lay down your arms, 
and only then do you perceive it false. 


w 170 L 3. 
It seems to be the enemy without that you attack. 
Yet your 
defense sets up an enemy within; an alien thought at war with you, 
depriving you of peace, splitting your mind into two camps which 
seem wholly irreconcilable. 
For love now has an "enemy," an oppo¬ 
site; and fear, the alien, now needs your defense against the threat of 
what you really are. 


W 170 L 4. 
If you consider carefully the means by which your fancied 
self-defense proceeds on its imagined way, you will perceive the 
premises on which the idea stands. 
First, it is obvious ideas must 
leave their source. 
For it is you who make attack, and must have 


1379 


11-375 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


first conceived of it. 
Yet you attack outside yourself, and separate 
your mind from him who is to be attacked, with perfect faith the 
split you made is real. 
W(378) 

w 170 L 5. 
Next are the attributes of love bestowed upon its "enemy." 
For fear becomes your safety and protector of your peace, to which 
you turn for solace and escape from doubts about your strength and 
hope of rest in dreamless quiet. 
And as love is shorn of what be¬ 
longs to it and it alone, love is endowed with attributes of fear. 
For 
love would ask you lay down all defense as merely foolish. 
And 
your arms indeed would crumble into dust. 
For such they are. 

w 170 L 6. 
With love as enemy must cruelty become a god, and gods 
demand that those who worship them obey their dictates, and re¬ 
fuse to question them. 
Fiarsh punishment is meted out relentlessly 
to those who ask if the demands are sensible or even sane. 
It is their 
enemies who are unreasonable and insane, while they are always 
merciful and just. 


w 170 L 7. 
Today we look upon this cruel god dispassionately. 
And 
we note that though his lips are smeared with blood and fire seems 
to flame from him, he is but made of stone. 
Fie can do nothing. 
We 
need not defy his power. 
Fie has none. 
And those who see in him 
their safety have no guardian, no strength to call upon in danger, 
and no mighty warrior to fight for them. 


W 170 L 8. 
This moment can be terrible. 
But it can also be the time of 
your release from abject slavery. 
You make a choice, standing be¬ 
fore this idol, seeing him exactly as he is. 
Will you restore to love 
what you have sought to wrest from it, and lay before this mindless 
piece of stone? Or will you make another idol to replace it? For the 
god of cruelty takes many forms. 
Another can be found. 


w 170 L 9. 
Yet do not think that fear is the escape from fear. 
Let us 
remember what the course has stressed about the obstacles to peace. 

The final one, the hardest to believe is nothing, and a seeming obsta¬ 
cle with the appearance of a solid block, impenetrable, fearful and 
beyond surmounting, is the fearW(379) of God himself. 
Ffere is the 
basic premise which enthrones the thought of fear as god. 
For fear 


11-376 


1380 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


is loved by those who worship it, and love appears to be invested 
now with cruelty. 


w 170 L10 . 
Where does the totally insane belief in gods of vengeance 
come from ? 528 Love has not confused its attributes with those of 
fear. 
Yet must the worshippers of fear perceive their own confusion 
in fear's "enemy"; its cruelty as now a part of love. 
And what be¬ 
comes more fearful than the Heart of Love Itself? The blood appears 
to be upon His lips; the fire comes from Him. 
And He is terrible 
above all else, cruel beyond conception, striking down all who ac¬ 
knowledge Him to be their God. 


w 170 L 11 . 
The choice you make today is certain. 
For you look for 
the last time upon this bit of carven stone you made, and call it god 
no longer. 
You have reached this place before, but you have chosen 
that this cruel god remain with you in still another form, and so the 
fear of God returned with you. 
This time you leave it here. 
And 
you return to a new world unburdened by its weight; beheld not in 
its sightless eyes, but in the vision that your choice restored to you. 

w 170 L 12. 
Now do your eyes belong to Christ, and He looks 
through them. 
Now your voice belongs to God, and echoes His. 


And now your heart remains at peace forever. 
You have chosen 
Him in place of idols, and your attributes, given by your Creator, 
are restored to you at last. 
The Call of God is heard and answered. 


Now has fear made way for love, as God Himself replaces cruelty. 


W(380) 

w 170 L 13. 
" Father , we are like You. 
No cruelty abides in us for there is 
none in You. 
Your peace is ours. 
And we bless the world with what 
we have received from You alone. 
We choose again and make our 
choice for all our brothers, knowing they are one with us. 
We bring 
them Your salvation as we have received it now. 
And we give thanks 
for them who render us complete. 
In them we see Your glory, and in 


5 s Deuteronomy 32:35 Vengeance is Mine, and recompense; Their foot shall slip in due time; For the 
day of their calamity is at hand, And the things to come hasten upon them. 



1381 


11-377 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


them we find our peace. 
Holy are we because Your holiness has set us 
free. 
And we give thanks. 
Amen. 
" 529 W(38i) 


529 The quotation marks are not in the Urtext manuscript, but are in all subsequent versions. 



11-378 


1382 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Review 5 (W170 R5) 

Introduction 

May 11,1970 

w 170 R5 l. 
We now review again. 
This time we are ready to give 
more effort and more time to what we undertake. 
We recognize we 
are preparing for another phase of understanding. 
We would take 
this step completely, that we may go on again more certain, more 
sincere, with faith upheld more surely. 
Our footsteps have not been 
unwavering, and doubts have made us walk uncertainly and slowly 
on the road this course sets forth. 
But now we hasten on, for we ap¬ 
proach a greater certainty, a firmer purpose and a surer goal. 


W 170 R5 2. 
Steady our feet, our Father; let our doubts be quiet and 
our holy minds be still, and speak to us. 
We have no words to give 
to You. 
We would but listen to Your Word and make it ours. 
Lead 
our practicing as does a father lead a little child along a way he does 
not understand. 
Yet does he follow, sure that he is safe because his 
father leads the way for him. 


W 170 R5 3. 
So do we bring our practicing to You. 
And if we stumble, 
You will raise us up. 
If we forget the way, we count upon Your sure 
remembering. 
We wander off, but You will not forget to call us 
back. 
Quicken our footsteps now, that we may walk more certainly 
and quickly unto You. 
And we accept the Word You offer us to 
unify our practicing, as we review the thoughts that You have given 
us. 


W 170 R5 4. 
This is the thought which should precede the thoughts 
that we review. 
Each one but clarifies some aspect of this thought, 
or helps it be more meaningful, more personal and true, and more 
descriptive of the holy Self we share and now prepare to know 
again: 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I. 
" 53 ° 


530 1 John 4:16 And we have known and believed the love that God has for us. 
God is love, and he who 
abides in love abides in God, and God in him. 



1383 


11-379 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


This Self alone knows love. 
This Self alone is perfectly consistent in 
Its thoughts; knows Its Creator, understands Itself, is perfect in Its 
knowledge and Its love, and never changes from Its constant state of 
union with Its Father and Itself. 
W(382) 

W 170 R5 5. 
And it is This that waits to meet us at the journey's end¬ 
ing. 
Every step we take brings us a little nearer. 
This review will 
shorten time immeasurably if we keep in mind that This remains 
our goal, and as we practice it is This to which we are approaching. 

Let us raise our hearts from dust to life as we remember This is 
promised us, and that this course was sent to open up the path of 
light to us, and teach us, step by step, how to return to the Eternal 
Self we thought we lost. 


w 170 R5 6. 
I take the journey with you. 
For I share your doubts and 
fears a little while, that you may come to me who recognize the road 
by which all fears and doubts are overcome. 
We walk together. 
I 
must understand uncertainty and pain, although I know they have 
no meaning. 
Yet a Savior must remain with those he teaches, seeing 
what they see, but still retaining in his mind the way which led him 
out, and now will lead you out with him. 
God’s Son is crucified un¬ 
til you walk along the road with me. 


W 170 R5 7. 
My resurrection comes again each time I lead a brother 
safely to the place at which the journey ends and is forgot. 
I am re¬ 
newed each time a brother learns there is a way from misery and 
pain. 
I am reborn each time a brother's mind turns to the light in 
him and looks for me. 
I have forgotten no-one. 
Help me now to 
lead you back to where the journey was begun, to make another 
choice with me. 


w 170 R5 8. 
Release me as you practice once again the thoughts I 
brought to you from Him Who sees your bitter need, and knows the 
answer God has given Him. 
Together we review these thoughts. 

Together we devote our time and effort to them. 
And together we 
will, teach them to our brothers. 
God would not have Heaven in¬ 
complete. 
It waits for you as I do. 
I am incomplete without your 
part in me. 
And as I am made whole, we go together to our ancient 


11-380 


1384 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


home, prepared for us before time was, and kept unchanged by 
time, immaculate and safe, as it will be at last, when time is done. 

W(383) 

W 170 R5 9. 
Let this review be then your gift to me. 
For this alone I 
need; that you will hear the words I speak and give them to the 
world. 
You are my voice, my eyes, my feet, my hands, through 
which I save the world. 
The Self from Which I call to you is but 
your Own. 
531 To Him we go together. 
Take your brother's hand, for 
this is not a way we walk alone. 
In him I walk with you and you 
with me. 
Our Father wills His Son be One 532 with Him. 
What lives 
but must not then be one with you? 

w 170 R5 10. 
Let this review become a time in which we share a new 
experience for you, yet one as old as time, and older still. 
Hallowed 
your name. 
533 Your glory undefiled forever. 
And your wholeness 
now complete, as God established it. 
You are His Son, completing 
His extension in your own. 
We practice but an ancient truth we 
knew before illusion seemed to claim the world. 
And we remind 
the world that it is free of all illusion every time we say, 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

W 170 R5 11. 
With this we start each day of our review. 
With this we 
start and end each period of practice time. 
And with this thought 
we sleep, to waken once again with these same words upon our lips 
to greet another day. 
No thought that we review but we surround 
with it, and use the thoughts to hold it up before our minds, and 
keep it clear in our remembrance throughout the day. 
And thus 
when we have finished this review, we will have recognized the 
words we speak are true. 
W(384) 

w 170 R5 12. 
Yet are the words but aids and to be used, except at the 
beginning and the end of practice periods, but to recall the mind, as 
needed, to its purpose. 
We place faith in the experience that comes 
from practice, not the means we use. 
We wait for the experience. 



531 Handwritten mark-up suggests (own). 


532 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


533 Matthew 6:9 “In this manner, therefore, pray: Our Father in heaven, Hallowed be Your name.” 


1385 


11-381 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


and recognize that it is only here conviction lies. 
We use the words, 
and try and try again to go beyond them to their meaning, which is 
far beyond their sound. 
The sound grows dim and disappears as 

we approach the Source of meaning. 
It is here that we find rest. 

W(385) 


11-382 


1386 

PROOF COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 171 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 171L l. 
151) "All things are echoes of the Voice of God." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

W 171 L 2. 
152) "The power of decision is my own." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 


1387 


11-383 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 172 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 172 L l. 
153) "In my defenselessness my safety lies." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

W 172 L 2. 
154) "I am among the ministers of God." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 


11-384 


1388 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 173 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 173 L l. 
155) "I will step back and let Him lead the way." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 
w 173 L 2. 
156) "I walk with God in perfect holiness." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 


1389 


11-385 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 174 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 174 L l. 
157) "Into His Presence would I enter now." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 
w 174 L 2. 
158) "Today I learn to give as I receive." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 


11-386 


1390 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 175 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 175 L l. 
159) "I give the miracles I have received." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 
w 175 L 2. 
160) "I am at home. 
Fear is the stranger here." 
"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." W(386) 


1391 


11-387 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 176 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 176 L l. 
161) "Give me your blessing, holy Son of God." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 
w 176 L 2. 
162) "I am as God created me." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 


11-388 


1392 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 177 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 177 L l. 
163) "There is no death. 
The Son of God is free." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 
w 177 L 2. 
164) "Now are we One with Him Who is our Source." 
"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 


1393 


11-389 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 178 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

W 178 L 1 . 
165) "Let not my mind deny the Thought of God." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 
w 178 L 2. 
166) "I am entrusted with the gifts of God." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 


11-390 


1394 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 179. 
"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 179 L l. 
167) "There is one life, and that I share with God." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

W179L2. 
168) "Your grace is given me. 
I claim it now." 
"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 


1395 


11-391 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 180 "God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

w 180 L l. 
169) "By grace I live. 
By grace I am released." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." 

W 180 L 2. 
170) "There is no cruelty in God and none in me." 

"God is but Love, and therefore so am I." W(387) 

W 180 L 3. 
Our next few lessons make a special point of firming up 
your willingness to make your weak commitment strong; your scat¬ 
tered goals blend into one intent. 
You are not asked for total dedica¬ 
tion all the time, as yet. 
But you are asked to practice now in order 
to attain the sense of peace such unified commitment will bestow, if 
only intermittently. 
It is experiencing this which makes it sure that 
you will give your total willingness to following the way the course 
sets forth. 


w 180 L 4. 
Our lessons now are geared specifically to widening hori¬ 
zons, and direct approaches to the special blocks which keep your 
vision narrow, and too limited to let you see the value of our goal. 

We are attempting now to lift these blocks, however briefly. 
Words 
alone can not convey the sense of liberation which their lifting 
brings. 
But the experience of freedom and of peace that comes as 
you give up your tight control of what you see speaks for itself. 


Your motivation will be so intensified that words become of little 
consequence. 
You will be sure of what you want, and what is value¬ 
less. 


w 180 L 5. 
And so we start our journey beyond words by concentrat¬ 
ing first on what impedes our progress still. 
Experience of what ex¬ 
ists beyond defensiveness remains beyond achievement while it is 
denied. 
It may be there, but you cannot accept its presence. 
So we 
now attempt to go past all defenses for a little while each day. 
No 
more than this is asked because no more than this is needed. 
It will 
be enough to guarantee the rest will come. 
W(388) 


11-392 


1396 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 181 "I trust my brothers, who are one with me." 

W 181 L 1. 
Trusting your brothers is essential to establishing and 
holding up your faith in your ability to transcend doubt and lack of 
sure conviction in yourself. 
When you attack a brother, you pro¬ 
claim that he is limited by what you have perceived in him. 
You do 
not look beyond his errors. 
Rather, they are magnified, becoming 
blocks to your awareness of the Self that lies beyond your own mis¬ 
takes, and past his seeming sins as well as yours, 
w 181L 2. 
Perception has a focus. 
It is this which gives consistency 
to what you see. 
Change but this focus, and what you behold will 
change accordingly. 
Your vision now will shift to give support to 
the intent which has replaced the one you held before. 
Remove 
your focus on your brother's sins, and you experience the peace that 
comes from faith in sinlessness. 
This faith receives its only sure 
support from what you see in others past their sins. 
For their mis¬ 
takes, if focused on, are witnesses to sins in you. 
And you will not 
transcend their sight and see the sinlessness that lies beyond. 


W 181 L 3. 
Therefore, in practicing today, we first let all such little 
focuses give way to our great need to let our sinlessness become ap¬ 
parent. 
We instruct our minds that it is this we seek and only this, 
for just a little while. 
We do not care about our future goals, and 
what we saw an instant previous has no concern for us within this 
interval of time wherein we practice changing our intent. 
We seek 
for innocence and nothing else. 
We seek for it with no concern but 
now. 
W(389) 

W 181 L 4. 
A major hazard to success has been involvement with 
your past and future goals. 
You have been quite preoccupied with 
how extremely different the goals this course is advocating are from 
those you held before. 
And you have also been dismayed by the 
depressing and restricting thought that, even if you should succeed, 
you will inevitably lose your way again. 


w 181L 5. 
How could this matter? For the past is gone; the future 
but imagined. 
These concerns are but defenses against present 


1397 

PROOF COPY 


11-393 


Part 1 


change of focus in perception. 
Nothing more. 
We lay these point¬ 
less limitations by a little while. 
We do not look to past beliefs, and 
what we will believe will not intrude upon us now. 
We enter in the 
time of practicing with one intent; to look upon the sinlessness 
within. 


w 181L 6. 
We recognize that we have lost this goal if anger blocks 
our way in any form. 
And if a brother's sins occur to us, our nar¬ 
rowed focus will restrict our sight and turn our eyes upon our own 
mistakes, which we will magnify and call our "sins". 
So, for a little 
while, without regard to past or future, should such blocks arise, we 
will transcend them with instructions to our minds to change their 
focus, as we say: 

"It is not this that I would look upon. 


I trust my brothers, who are one with me." 

w 181L 7. 
And we will also use these thoughts to keep us safe 
throughout the day. 
We do not seek for long-range goals. 
As each 
obstruction seems to block the vision of our sinlessness, we seek but 
for surcease an instant from the misery the focus upon sin will 
bring, and uncorrected will remain. 
W(390) 

w 181L 8. 
Nor do we ask for fantasies. 
For what we seek to look 
upon is really there. 
And as our focus goes beyond mistakes, we 
will behold a wholly sinless world. 
When seeing this is all we want 
to see, when this is all we seek for in the name of true perception, 
are the eyes of Christ inevitably ours. 
And the love He feels for us 
becomes our own as well. 
This will become the only thing we see 
reflected in the world and in ourselves. 


W 181 L 9. 
The world which once proclaimed our sins becomes the 
proof that we are sinless. 
And our love for everyone we look upon 
attests to our remembrance of the holy Self Which knows no sin, 
and never could conceive of anything without Its sinlessness, 
w 181 L 10. 
We seek for this remembrance as we turn our minds to 
practicing today. 
We look neither ahead nor backwards. 
We look 
straight into the present. 
And we give our trust to the experience 


11-394 


1398 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


we ask for now. 
Our sinlessness is but the Will of God. 
This instant 
is our willing one with His. 
W(391) 


-mao 

PROOF COPY 


11-395 


Part 1 


Lesson 182 "I call upon God's Name and on my own." 534 

w 182 L l. 
God's Name is holy, but no holier than yours. 
To call 
upon His Name is but to call upon your own. 
A father gives his son 
his name, and thus identifies the son with him. 
His brothers share 
his name, and thus are they united in a bond to which they turn for 
their identity. 
Your Father's Name reminds you who you are, even 
within a world which does not know; even though you have not 
remembered it. 


W 182 L 2. 
God's Name can not be heard without response, nor said 
without an echo in the mind which calls you to remember. 
Say His 
Name, and you invite the angels to surround the ground on which 
you stand, and sing to you as they spread out their wings to keep 
you safe, and shelter you from every worldly thought that would 
intrude upon your holiness. 


w 182 L 3. 
Repeat God's Name and all the world responds by laying 
down illusions. 
Every dream the world holds dear has suddenly 
gone by, and where it seemed to stand you find a star; a miracle of 
grace. 
The sick arise, healed of their sickly thoughts. 
The blind can 
see; the deaf can hear . 
535 The sorrowful cast off their mourning, and 
the tears of pain are dried as happy laughter comes to bless the 
world . 
536 

w 182 L 4. 
Repeat the Name of God and little names have lost their 
meaning. 
No temptation but becomes a nameless and unwanted 
thing before God's Name. 
Repeat His Name and see how easily you 
will forget the names of all the gods you valued. 
They have lost the 
name of god you gave them. 
They become anonymous and value- 


534 Lessons 182 and 183 are reversed in the Notes and in FIP as compared to this order in the Urtext 
manuscript. 


535 Originally in the Urtext manuscript there is just a comma here, no sentence break. 
Handwritten 
mark-up suggests the break and we agree it is better. 
The Notes has a full stop also. 


536 Isaiah 25:8 He will swallow up death forever, And the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from all 
faces; The rebuke of His people He will take away from all the earth; For the LORD has spoken. 

Revelation 7:17 For the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne will shepherd them and lead them to 
living fountains of waters. 
And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.” 

Revelation 21:4 And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes; there shall be no more death, nor 
sorrow, nor crying. 
There shall be no more pain, for the former things have passed away.” 


11-396 


1400 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


less to you, although before you let the Name of God replace their 
little names, you stood before them worshipfully, naming them as 
gods. 
W(392) 

w 182 L 5. 
Repeat the Name of God and call upon your Self, Whose 
Name is His. 
Repeat His Name and all the tiny, nameless things on 
earth slip into right perspective. 
Those who call upon the Name of 
God can not mistake the nameless for the Name, nor sin for grace 
nor bodies for the holy Son of God. 
And should you join a brother 
as you sit with him in silence, and repeat God's Name along with 
him within your quiet minds, you have established there an altar 
which reaches to God Himself and to His Son. 

w 182 L 6. 
Practice but this today; repeat God's Name slowly again 
and still again. 
Become oblivious to every name but His. 
Hear 
nothing else. 
Let all your thoughts become anchored on This. 
No 
other words we use except at the beginning, when we say today's 
idea but once. 
And then God's Name becomes our only thought, 
our only word, the only thing that occupies our minds, the only 
wish we have, the only sound with any meaning, and the only 
Name of everything that we desire to see; of everything that we 
would call our own. 


W 182 L 7. 
Thus do we give an invitation which can never be refused. 

And God will come and answer it Himself. 
Think not He hears the 
little prayers of those who call on Him with names of idols cher¬ 
ished by the world. 
They cannot reach Him thus. 
He cannot hear 
requests that He be not Himself, or that His Son receive another 
name than His. 
Repeat His Name and you acknowledge Him as 
sole Creator of Reality. 
And you acknowledge also that His Son is 
part of Him, creating in His Name. 


w 182 L 8. 
Sit silently and let His Name become the all-encompassing 
idea which holds your mind completely. 
Let all thoughts be still 
except this one . 
537 And to all other thoughts respond with This, and 


537 Originally in the Urtext manuscript capitalized as “One”, handwriting suggests (one). 
We agree it 
should not be capitalized. 



1401 


11-397 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


see God's Name replace the thousand little names you gave your 
thoughts, not realizing that there is One 538 Name for all there is, and 
all that there will be. 
W(393) 

w 182 L 9. 
Today you can achieve a state in which you will experi¬ 
ence the gifts of grace. 
You can escape all bondage of the world, 
and give the world the same release you found. 
You can remember 
what the world forgot, and offer it your own remembering. 
You can 
accept today the part you play in its salvation and your own as well, 
and both can be accomplished perfectly. 


W 182 L 10. 
Turn to the Name of God for your release, and it is given 
you. 
No prayer but this is necessary, for it holds them all within it. 

Words are insignificant and all requests unneeded when God's Son 
calls on His Father's Name. 
His Father's Thoughts become his own. 

He makes his claim to all his Father gave, is giving still, and will 
forever give. 
He calls on Him to let all things he thought he made 
be nameless now, and in their place the holy Name of God becomes 
his judgment of their worthlessness. 


w 182 L ll. 
All little things are silent. 
Little sounds are soundless 
now. 
The little things of earth have disappeared. 
The universe con¬ 
sists of nothing but the Son of God who calls upon his Father. 
And 
his Father's Voice gives answer in his Father's holy Name. 
In this 
eternal, still relationship, in which communication far transcends all 
words and yet exceeds in depth and height whatever words could 
possibly convey, is peace eternal. 
In our Father's Name, we would 

experience this peace today. 
And in His Name it shall be given us. 

W(394) 


538 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 



11-398 


1402 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 183 "I will be still a moment and go home." 

W 183 L 1 . 
This world you seem to live in is not home to you. 
And 
somewhere in your mind you know that this is true. 
A memory of 
home keeps haunting you, as if there were a place which called you 
to return although you do not recognize the Voice, nor what it is the 
Voice reminds you of. 
Yet still you feel an alien here, from some¬ 
where all unknown. 
Nothing so definite that you could say with 
certainty you are an exile here. 
Just a persistent feeling, sometimes 
not more than a tiny throb, at other times hardly remembered, ac¬ 
tively dismissed, but surely to return to mind again, 
w 183 L 2. 
No-one but knows whereof we speak. 
Yet some try to put 
by their suffering in games they play to occupy their time, and keep 
their sadness from them. 
Others will deny that they are sad, and do 
not recognize their tears at all. 
Still others will maintain that what 
we speak of is illusion, not to be considered more than but a dream. 

Yet who in simple honesty, without defensiveness and self decep¬ 
tion, would deny he understands the words we speak? 
w 183 L 3. 
We speak today for everyone who walks this world, for he 
is not at home. 
He goes uncertainly about in endless search, seeking 
in darkness what he cannot find; not recognizing what it is he seeks. 

A thousand homes he makes, yet none contents his restless mind. 


He does not understand he builds in vain. 
The home he seeks can 
not be made by him. 
There is no substitute for Heaven. 
All he ever 
made was hell. 


W 183 L 4. 
Perhaps you think it is your childhood home that you 
would find again. 
The childhood of your body and its place of shel¬ 
ter are a memory now so distorted that you merely hold a picture of 
a past that never happened. 
Yet there is a Child in you Who seeks 
His Father's house , 539 and knows that He is alien here. 
This Child¬ 
hood is eternal, with an innocence that will endure forever. 
Where 


539 John 14:2 “In My Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. 
I go to 
prepare a place for you.” 


1403 


11-399 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


this Child shall go is holy ground . 
540 It is His holiness that lights up 
Heaven, and that brings to earth the pure reflection of the light 
above, wherein are earth and Heaven joined as one. 
W(395) 

W 183 L 5. 
It is this Child in you your Father knows as His Own Son. 

It is this Child Who knows His Father. 
He desires to go home so 
deeply, so unceasingly. 
His Voice cries unto you to let Him rest a 
while. 
He does not ask for more than just a few instants of respite; 
just an interval in which He can return to breathe again the holy air 
that fills His Father's house. 
You are His home as well. 
He will re¬ 
turn. 
But give Him just a little time to be Himself, within the peace 
that is His home, resting in silence and in peace and in love. 


W 183 L 6. 
This Child needs your protection. 
He is far from home. 


He is so little that He seems so easily shut out. 
His tiny Voice so 
readily obscured. 
His calls for help almost unheard amid the grating 
sounds and harsh and rasping noises of the world. 
Yet does He 
know that in you still abides His sure protection. 
You Will fail Him 
not. 
He will go home, and you along with Him. 

w 183 L 7. 
This Child is your defenselessness, your strength. 
He 
trusts in you. 
He came because He knew you would not fail. 
He 
whispers of His home unceasingly to you. 
For He would bring you 
back with Him, that He Himself might stay, and not return again 
where He does not belong and where He lives an outcast in a world 
of alien thoughts. 
His patience has no limits. 
He will wait until you 
hear His gentle Voice within you, calling you to let Him go in peace, 
along with you, to where He is at home, and you with Him. 


W 183 L 8. 
When you are still an instant, when the world recedes 
from you, when valueless ideas cease to have value in your restless 
mind, then will you hear His Voice. 
So poignantly He calls to you 
that you will not resist Him longer. 
In that instant. 
He will take you 
to His home, and you will stay with Him in perfect stillness, silent 


540 Exodus 3:5 Then He said, “Do not draw near this place. 
Take your sandals off your feet, for the 
place where you stand is holy ground.” 


11-400 


1404 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


and at peace, beyond all words, untouched by fear and doubt, sub¬ 
limely certain that you are at home. 
W(396) 

W 183 L 9. 
Rest with Him frequently today. 
For He was willing to 
become a little Child that you might learn of Him how strong is he 
who comes without defenses, offering only love's messages to those 
who think He is their enemy. 
He holds the might of Heaven in His 
hand and calls them friend, and gives His strength to them that they 
may see He would be Friend to them. 
He asks but 541 they protect 
Him, for His home is far away, and He will not return to it alone. 


w 183 L 10. 
Christ is reborn as but a little Child each time a wanderer 
would leave his home. 
For he must learn that what he would pro¬ 
tect is but this Child, Who comes defenseless and Who is protected 
by defenselessness. 
Go home with Him from time to time today. 

You are as much an alien here as He. 


w 183 L 11 . 
Take time today to lay aside your shield which profits 
nothing , 542 and lay down the spear and sword you raised against an 
enemy without existence. 
Christ has called you friend and brother. 

He has even come to you to ask your help in letting Him go home 
completed and completely. 
He has come as does a little child who 
must beseech his father for protection and for love. 
He rules the 
universe, and yet He asks unceasingly that you return with Him, 
and take illusions as your gods no more. 


W 183 L 12. 
You have not lost your innocence. 
It is for this you yearn. 

This is your heart's desire. 
This is the Voice you hear, and this the 
Call which cannot be denied. 
The holy Child remains with you. 
His 
home is yours. 
Today He gives you His defenselessness, and you 
accept it in exchange for all the toys of battle you have made. 
And 
now the way is open, and the journey has an end in sight at last. 
Be 

still a moment and go home with Him and be at peace awhile. 
W(397) 
W(398) 


341 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that) in place of “but”. 


34 “ John 6:63 "It is the Spirit who gives life; the flesh profits nothing. 
The words that I speak to you are 
spirit, and they are life.” 


1405 


11-401 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 184 "The Name of God is my inheritance." 

W 184 L 1 . 
You live by symbols. 
You have made up names for every¬ 
thing you see. 
Each one becomes a separate entity, identified by its 
own name. 
By this you carve it out of unity. 
By this you designate 
its special attributes, and set it off from other things by emphasizing 
space surrounding it. 
This space you lay between all things to 
which you give a different name; all happenings in terms of place 
and time; all bodies which are greeted with a name, 
w 184 L 2. 
This space you see as setting off all things from one an¬ 
other is the means by which the world's perception is achieved. 
You 
see something where nothing is, and see as well nothing where 
there is unity; a space between all things, between all things and 
you. 
Thus do you think that you have given life in separation. 
By 
this split you think you are established as a unity which functions 
with an independent will. 


w 184 L 3. 
What are these names by which the world becomes a se¬ 
ries of discrete events, of things ununified, of bodies kept apart and 
holding bits of mind as separate awarenesses? You gave these 
names to them, establishing perception as you wished to have per¬ 
ception be. 
The nameless things were given names, and thus reality 
was given them as well. 
For what is named is given meaning, and 
will then be seen as meaningful, a cause of true effects, with conse¬ 
quence inherent in itself. 


w 184 L 4. 
This is the way reality is made by partial vision, purpose¬ 
fully set against the given truth. 
Its enemy is wholeness. 
It con¬ 
ceives of little things, and looks upon them. 
And a lack of space, a 
sense of unity or vision which sees differently become the threats 
which it must overcome, conflict with and deny. 
W(399) 

W 184 L 5. 
Yet does this other vision still remain a natural direction 
for the mind to channel its perception. 
It is hard to teach the mind a 
thousand alien names and thousands more. 
Yet you believe this is 
what learning means; its one essential goal by which communica¬ 
tion is achieved and concepts can be meaningfully shared. 



11-402 


1406 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


W 184 L 6. 
This is the sum of the inheritance the world bestows. 
And 
everyone who learns to think that it is so accepts the signs and sym¬ 
bols which assert the world is real. 
It is for this they stand. 
They 
leave no doubt that what is named is there. 
It can be seen, as is an¬ 
ticipated. 
What denies that it is true 543 is but illusion, for it is the ul¬ 
timate reality. 
To question it is madness; to accept its presence is the 
proof of sanity. 


w 184 L 7. 
Such is the teaching of the world. 
It is a phase of learning 
everyone who comes must go through. 
But the sooner he perceives 
on what it rests, how questionable are its premises, how doubtful its 
results, the sooner does he question its effects. 
Learning which 
stops with what the world would teach stops short of meaning. 
In 
its proper place, it serves but as a starting point from which another 
kind of learning can begin, a new perception can be gained, and all 
the arbitrary names the world bestows can be withdrawn as they are 
raised to doubt. 


w 184 L 8. 
Think not you made the world. 
Illusions, yes! But what is 
true in earth and Heaven is beyond your naming. 
When you call 
upon a brother, it is to his body that you make appeal. 
His true 
identity is hidden from you by what you believe he really is. 
His 
body makes response to what you call him, for his mind consents to 
take the name you give him as his own. 
And thus his unity is twice 
denied, for you perceive him separate from you, and he accepts this 
separate name as his. 
W(400) 

w 184 L 9. 
It would indeed be strange if you were asked to go beyond 
all symbols of the world, forgetting them forever; yet were asked to 
take a teaching function. 
You have need to use the symbols of the 
world a while. 
But be you not deceived by them as well. 
They do 
not stand for anything at all, and in your practicing it is this thought 
which will release you from them. 
They become but means by 
which you can communicate in ways the world can understand, but 


543 Original typing shows “false” but handwritten in is (true). 
The handwritten correction appears to 
work better here, so has been adopted. 



1407 


11-403 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


which you recognize is not the unity where true communication can 
be found. 


W 184 L 10. 
Thus what you need are intervals each day in which the 
learning of the world becomes a transitory phase; a prison house 
from which you go into the sunlight and forget the darkness. 
Here 
you understand the Word, the Name Which God has given you; the 
One 544 Identity Which all things share; the one acknowledgment of 
what is true. 
And then step back to darkness, not because you think 
it real, but only to proclaim its unreality in terms which still have 
meaning in the world which darkness rules. 


w 184 L ll. 
Use all the little names and symbols which delineate the 
world of darkness. 
Yet accept them not as your reality. 
The Holy 
Spirit uses all of them, but He does not forget creation has One 545 
Name, One 546 Meaning and a single Source Which unifies all things 
within Itself. 
Use all the names the world bestows on them but for 
convenience, yet do not forget they share the Name of God along 
with you. 


w 184 L 12. 
God has no name. 
And yet His Name becomes the final 
lesson that all things are one, and at this lesson does all learning 
end. 
All names are unified; all space is filled with truth's reflection. 

Every gap is closed, and separation healed. 
The Name of God is the 
inheritance He gave to those who chose the teaching of the world to 
take the place of Heaven. 
In our practicing, our purpose is to let our 
minds accept what He has given as the answer to the pitiful inheri¬ 
tance you made as fitting tribute to the Son He loves. 
W(40l) 

w 184 L 13. 
No-one can fail who seeks the meaning of the Name of 
God. 
Experience must come to supplement the Word. 
But first you 
must accept One 547 Name for all reality, and realize the many names 
you gave its aspects have distorted what you see but have not inter- 


1: Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 

343 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one) 
546 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 

347 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 



11-404 


1408 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


fered with truth at all. 
One Name we bring into our practicing. 
One 
Name we use to unify our sight. 


w 184 L 14. 
And though we use a different name for each awareness 
of an aspect of God's Son, we understand that they have but One 548 
Name Which He has given them. 
It is this Name we use in practic¬ 
ing. 
And through Its use, all foolish separations disappear which 
kept us blind. 
And we are given strength to see beyond them. 
Now 
our sight is blessed with blessings we can give as we receive, 
w 184 L 15. 
"Father, our Name is Yours. 
In It we are united with all 
living things, and You Who are their One Creator. 
What we made 
and call by many different names is but a shadow we have tried to 
cast across Your Own Reality. 
And we are glad and thankful we 
were wrong. 
All our mistakes we give to you, that we may be ab¬ 
solved of all effects our errors seemed to have. 
And we accept the 
truth You give in place of every one of them. 
Your Name is our sal¬ 
vation and escape from what we made. 
Your Name unites us in the 
Oneness which is our inheritance and peace. 
Amen. 
549 " W(402) 


' h Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


549 The quotation marks are not in the Urtext manuscript. 
We include them because all other editions 
do. 



1409 


11-405 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 185 "I want the peace of God." 

w 185 L l. 
To say these words is nothing. 
But to mean these words is 
everything. 
If you could but mean them for just an instant, there 
would be no further sorrow possible for you in any form; in any 
place or time. 
Heaven would be completely given back to full 
awareness, memory of God entirely restored, the resurrection of all 
creation fully recognized. 


W 185 L 2. 
No-one can mean these words and not be healed. 
He can¬ 
not play with dreams, nor think he is himself a dream. 
He cannot 
make a hell and think it real. 
He wants the peace of God and it is 
given him. 
For that is all he wants, and that is all he will receive. 

Many have said these words. 
But few indeed have meant them. 


You have but to look upon the world you see around you to be sure 
how very few they are. 
The world would be completely changed 
should any two agree these words express the only thing they 


want . 
550 


W 185 L 3. 
Two minds with one intent become so strong that what 
they will becomes the Will of God. 
For minds can only join in truth. 

In dreams, no two can share the same intent. 
To each, the hero of 
the dream is different; the outcome wanted not the same for both. 

Loser and gainer merely shift about in changing patterns, as the ra¬ 
tio of gain to loss and loss to gain takes on a different aspect or an¬ 
other form. 


W 185 L 4. 
Yet compromise alone a dream can bring. 
Sometimes it 
takes the form of union, but only the form. 
The meaning must es¬ 
cape the dream, for compromising is the goal of dreaming. 
Minds 
cannot unite in dreams. 
They merely bargain. 
And what bargain 
can give them the peace of God? Illusions come to take His place. 

And what He means is lost to sleeping minds intent on compromise, 
each to his gain and to another's loss. 
W(403) 


550 Matthew 18:19 “Again I say to you that if two of you agree on earth concerning anything that they 
ask, it will be done for them by My Father in heaven”. 



11-406 


1410 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 185 L 5. 
To mean you want the peace of God is to renounce all 
dreams. 
For no-one means these words who wants illusions, and 
who therefore seeks the means which bring illusions. 
He has looked 
on them and found them wanting. 
Now he seeks to go beyond 
them, recognizing that another dream would offer nothing more 
than all the others. 
Dreams are one to him. 
And he has learned 
their only difference is one of form, for one will bring the same de¬ 
spair and misery as do the rest. 


W 185 L 6. 
The mind which means that all it wants is peace must join 
with other minds, for that is how peace is obtained. 
And when the 
wish for peace is genuine, the means for finding it is given in a form 
each mind which seeks for it in honesty can understand. 
Whatever 
form the lesson takes is planned for him in such a way that he can 
not mistake it if his asking is sincere. 
And 551 if he asks without sin¬ 
cerity, there is no form in which the lesson will meet with accep¬ 
tance and be truly learned. 


W 185 L 7. 
Let us today devote our practicing to recognizing that we 
really mean the words we say. 
We want the peace of God. 
This is 
no idle wish. 
These words do not request another dream be given 
us. 
They do not ask for compromise, nor try to make another bar¬ 
gain in the hope that there must yet be one which can succeed 
where all the rest have failed. 
To mean these words acknowledges 
illusions are in vain, requesting the eternal in the place of shifting 
dreams which seem to change in what they offer, but are one in 
nothingness. 


w 185 L 8. 
Today devote your practice periods to careful searching of 
your mind, to find the dreams you cherish still. 
What do you ask 
for in your heart? Forget the words you use in making your re¬ 
quests. 
Consider but what you believe will comfort you and bring 
you happiness. 
But be you not dismayed by lingering illusions, for 
their form is not what matters now. 
Let not some dreams be more 
acceptable, reserving shame and secrecy for others. 
They are one. 



351 Handwritten mark-up suggests (But). 



1411 


11-407 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


W(404) And being one, one question should be asked of all of them; 
"Is this what I would have in place of Heaven and the peace of 


God? 


w 185 L 9. 
This is the choice you make. 
Be not deceived that it is oth¬ 
erwise. 
No compromise is possible in this. 
You choose God's peace 
or you have asked for dreams, and dreams will come as you re¬ 
quested them. 
Yet will God's peace come just as certainly, and to 
remain with you forever. 
It will not be gone with every twist and 
turning of the road, to reappear unrecognized in forms which shift 
and change with every step you take. 


w 185 L 10. 
You want the peace of God. 
And so do all who seem to 
seek for dreams. 
For them as well as for yourself you ask but this 
when you make this request with deep sincerity. 
For thus you reach 
to what they really want, and join your own intent with what they 
seek above all things, perhaps unknown to them, but sure to you. 


You have been weak at times, uncertain in your purpose, and un¬ 
sure of what you wanted, where to look for it, and where to turn for 
help in the attempt. 
Help has been given you. 
And would you not 
avail yourself of it 552 by sharing it? 

w 185 L ll. 
No-one who truly seeks the peace of God can fail to find 
it . 
553 For he merely asks that he deceive himself no longer by deny¬ 
ing to himself what is God's Will. 
Who can remain unsatisfied who 
asks for what he has already? Who could be unanswered who re¬ 
quests an answer which is his to give? The peace of God is yours, 
w 185 L12. 
For you it was 554 created, given you by its Creator, and 
established as His Own eternal gift. 
How can you fail when you but 
ask for what He wills for you? And how could your request be lim¬ 
ited to you alone? No gift of God can be unshared. 
It is this attrib¬ 
ute which sets the gifts of God apart from every dream that ever 
seemed to take the place of truth. 
W(405) 


552 Handwritten mark-up suggests(help). 


553 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 

554 Handwritten mark-up suggests (was peace) in place of “it was”. 



11-408 


1412 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


W 185 L 13. 
No-one can lose and everyone must gain whenever any 
gift of God has been requested and received by anyone. 
God gives 
but to unite. 
To take away is meaningless to Him. 
And when it is as 
meaningless to you, you can be sure you share One 555 Will with Him 
and He with you. 
And you will also know you share One 556 Will 
with all your brothers, whose intent is yours. 


W 185 L 14. 
It is this one intent we seek today, uniting our desires 
with the need of every heart, the call of every mind, the hope that 
lies beyond despair, the love attack would hide, the brotherhood 
that hate has sought to sever, but which still remains as God created 
it. 
With Help like this beside us, can we fail today as we request the 
peace of God be given us? W(406) 


553 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 

556 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 



1413 

PROOF COPY 


11-409 



Part 1 


Lesson 186 "Salvation of the world depends on me." 

w 186 L l. 
Here is the statement that will one day take all arrogance 
away from every mind. 
Here is the thought of true humility which 
holds no function as your own but that which has been given you. 


It offers your acceptance of a part assigned to you, without insisting 
on another role. 
It does not judge your proper role. 
It but acknowl¬ 
edges the Will of God is done on earth as well as Heaven . 
557 It unites 
all wills on earth in Heaven's plan to save the world, restoring it to 
Heaven's peace. 


W 186 L 2. 
Let us not fight our function. 
We did not establish it. 
It is 
not our idea. 
The means are given us by which it will be perfectly 
accomplished. 
All that we are asked to do is to accept our part in 
genuine humility, and not deny with self-deceiving arrogance that 
we are worthy. 
What is given us to do we have the strength to do. 

Our minds are suited perfectly to take the part assigned to us by 
One Who knows us well. 


w 186 L 3. 
Today's idea may seem quite sobering until you see its 
meaning. 
All it says is that your Father still remembers you, and 
offers you the perfect trust He holds in you who are His Son. 
It does 
not ask that you be different in any way from what you are. 
What 
could humility request but this? And what could arrogance deny 
but this? Today we will not shrink from our assignment on the spe¬ 
cious grounds that modesty is outraged. 
It is pride that would deny 
the Call of God Himself. 


w 186 L 4. 
All false humility we lay aside today, that we may listen to 
God's Voice reveal to us what He would have us do. 
We do not 
doubt our adequacy for the function He will offer us. 
We will be 
certain only that He knows our strengths, our wisdom and our holi¬ 
ness. 
And if He deems us worthy, so we are. 
It is but arrogance that 
judges otherwise. 
W(407) 


557 Matthew 6:10 “Your kingdom come. 
Your will be done On earth as it is in heaven." 


11-410 


1414 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 186 L 5. 
There is one way, and only one, to be released from the 
imprisonment your plan to prove the false is true has brought to 
you. 
Accept the plan you did not make instead. 
Judge not your 
value to it. 
If God's Voice assures you that salvation needs your 
part, and that the whole depends on you, be sure that it is so. 
The 
arrogant must cling to words, afraid to go beyond them to experi¬ 
ence which might affront their stance. 
Yet are the humble free to 
hear the Voice Which tells them what they are and what to do. 


W 186 L 6. 
Arrogance makes an image of yourself that is not real. 
It is 
this image which quails and retreats in terror as the Voice for God 
assures you that you have the strength, the wisdom and the holiness 
to go beyond all images. 
You are not weak, as is the image of your¬ 
self. 
You are not ignorant and helpless. 
Sin can not tarnish the truth 
in you, and misery can come not near the holy home of God. 

w 186 L 7. 
All this the Voice for God relates to you. 
And as He 
speaks, the image trembles and seeks to attack the threat it does not 
know, sensing its basis crumble. 
Let it go. 
Salvation of the world 
depends on you, and not upon this little pile of dust. 
What can it 
tell the holy Son of God? Why need he be concerned with it at all? 
w 186 L 8. 
And so we find our peace. 
We will accept the function 
God has given us, for all illusions rest upon the weird 558 belief that 
we can make another for ourselves. 
Our self-made roles are shift¬ 
ing, and they seem to change from mourner to ecstatic bliss of love 
and loving. 
We can laugh or weep, and greet the day with welcome 
or with tears. 
Our very being seems to change as we experience a 
thousand shifts in mood, and our emotions raise us high indeed or 
dash us to the ground in hopelessness. 
W(408) 

w 186 L 9. 
Is this the Son of God? Could He create such instability 
and call it Son? He Who is changeless shares His attributes with His 
creation. 
All the images His Son appears to make have no effect on 
what he is. 
They blow across his mind like wind-swept leaves that 


558 Handwritten mark-up suggests (strange). 



1415 


11-411 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


form a patterning an instant, break apart to group again, and scam¬ 
per off. 
Or like mirages seen above a desert, rising from the dust, 
w 186 L 10. 
These unsubstantial images will go, and leave your mind 
unclouded and serene when you accept the function given you. 
The 
images you make give rise to but conflicting goals, impermanent 
and vague, uncertain and ambiguous. 
Who could be constant in his 
efforts, or direct his energies and concentrated drive toward goals 
like these? The functions which the world esteems are so uncertain 
that they change ten times an hour at their most secure. 
What hope 
of gain can rest on goals like this? 

W 186 L 11. 
In lovely contrast, certain as the sun's return each morn¬ 
ing to dispel the night, your truly given function stands out clear 
and wholly unambiguous. 
There is no doubt of its validity. 
It 
comes from One Who knows no error. 
And His Voice is certain of 
Its messages. 
They will not change nor be in conflict. 
All of them 
point to one goal, and one you can attain. 
Your plan may be impos¬ 
sible, but God's can never fail because He is its Source, 
w 186 L12. 
Do as His 559 Voice directs. 
And if It asks a thing of you 
that seems impossible, remember Who it is that asks and who 
would make denial. 
Then consider this; which is more likely to be 
right? The Voice that speaks for the Creator of all things. 
Who 
knows all things exactly as they are, or a distorted image of yourself, 
confused, bewildered, inconsistent and unsure of everything? Let 
not its voice direct you. 
Hear instead a certain W(409) Voice Which 
tells you of a function given you by your Creator, Who remembers 
you and urges that you now remember Him. 


w 186 L 13. 
His gentle Voice is calling from the known to the un¬ 
knowing. 
560 He would comfort you although He knows no sorrow. 

He would make a restitution though He is complete; a gift to you 
although He knows that you have everything already. 
He has 
Thoughts which answer every need His Son perceives, although He 


559 Handwritten mark-up suggests (God's). 


560 Handwritten mark-up suggests (For). 



11-412 


1416 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


sees them not. 
For Love must give, and what is given in His Name 
takes on the form most useful in a world of form, 
w 186 L14. 
These are the forms which never can deceive, although 561 
they come from Formlessness Itself. 
Forgiveness is an earthly form 
of love which as it is in Heaven has no form. 
Yet what is needed 
here is given here as it is needed. 
In this form you can fulfill your 
function even here, although what love will mean to you when 
formlessness has been restored to you is greater still. 
Salvation of 
the world depends on you who can forgive. 
Such is your function 
here. 
W(410) 


361 Handwritten mark-up suggests (because). 



1417 


11-413 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 187 "I bless the world because I bless myself." 

W 187 L 1 . 
No-one can give unless he has. 
In fact, giving is proof of 
having. 
We have made this point before. 
What seems to make it 
hard to credit is not this. 
No-one can doubt that you must first pos¬ 
sess what you would give. 
It is the second phase on which the 
world and true perception differ. 
Having had and given, then the 
world asserts that you have lost what you possessed. 
The truth 
maintains that giving will increase what you possess, 
w 187 L 2. 
How is this possible? For it is sure that if you give a finite 
thing away, your body's eyes will not perceive it yours. 
Yet we have 
learned that things but represent the thoughts which make them. 

And you do not lack for proof that when you give ideas away, you 
strengthen them in your own mind. 
Perhaps the form in which the 
thought seems to appear is changed in giving. 
Yet it must return to 
him who gives. 
Nor can the form it takes be less acceptable. 
It must 
be more. 


w 187 L 3. 
Ideas must first belong to you before you give them. 
If 
you are to save the world, you first accept salvation for yourself. 


But you will not believe that this is done until you see the miracles it 
brings to everyone you look upon. 
Herein is the idea of giving clari¬ 
fied and given meaning. 
Now you can perceive that by your giving 
is your store increased. 


w 187 L 4. 
Protect all things you value by the act of giving them 
away, and you are sure that you will never lose them. 
What you 
thought you did not have is thereby proven yours. 
Yet value not its 
form. 
For this will change, and grow unrecognizable in time, how¬ 
ever much you try to keep it safe. 
No form endures. 
It is the 
thought behind the form of things that lives unchangeable. 
W(411) 

W 187 L 5. 
Give gladly. 
You can only gain thereby. 
The thought re¬ 
mains and grows in strength as it is reinforced by giving. 
Thoughts 
extend as they are shared, for they can not be lost. 
There is no giver 
and receiver in the sense the world conceives of them. 
There is a 
giver who retains; another who will give as well. 
And both must 


11-414 


1418 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


gain in this exchange, for each will have the thought in form most 
helpful to him. 
What he seems to lose is always something he will 
value less than what will surely be returned to him. 


w 187 L 6. 
Never forget you give but to yourself. 
Who understands 
what giving means must laugh at the idea of sacrifice. 
Nor can he 
fail to recognize the many forms which sacrifice may take. 
He 
laughs as well at pain and loss, at sickness and at grief, at poverty, 
starvation and at death. 
He recognizes sacrifice remains the one 
idea that stands behind them all, and in his gentle laughter are they 
healed. 


w 187 L 7. 
Illusion recognized must disappear. 
Accept not suffering, 
and you remove the thought of suffering. 
Your blessing lies on eve¬ 
ryone who suffers when you choose to see all suffering as what it is. 

The thought of sacrifice gives rise to all the forms that suffering ap¬ 
pears to take. 
And sacrifice is an idea so mad that sanity dismisses 
it at once. 


w 187 L 8. 
Never believe that you can sacrifice. 
There is no place for 
sacrifice in what has any value. 
If the thought occurs, its very pres¬ 
ence proves that error has arisen, and correction must be made. 


Your blessing will correct it. 
Given first to you, it now is yours to 
give as well. 
No form of sacrifice and suffering can long endure be¬ 
fore the face of one who has forgiven and has blessed himself. 
W(412) 
W 187 L 9. 
The lilies that your brother offers you are laid upon your 
altar, with the ones you offer him beside them. 
Who could fear to 
look upon such lovely holiness? The great illusion of the fear of 
God diminishes to nothingness before the purity that you will look 
on here. 
Be not afraid to look. 
The blessedness you will behold will 
take away all thought of form, and leave instead the perfect gift for¬ 
ever there, forever to increase, forever yours, forever given away, 
w 187 L 10. 
Now are we one in thought, for fear has gone. 
And here, 
before the altar to one God, one Father, one Creator and one 
Thought, we stand together as one Son of God. 
Not separate from 
Him Who is our Source; not distant from one brother who is part of 
our one Self Whose innocence has joined us all as one, we stand in 


1419 


11-415 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


blessedness and give as we received. 
The Name of God is on our 
lips. 
And as we look within, we see the purity of Heaven shine in 
our reflection of our Father's Love. 


w 187 L 11 . 
Now are we blessed, and now we bless the world. 
What 
we have looked upon we would extend, for we would see it every¬ 
where. 
We would behold it shining with the grace of God in every¬ 
one. 
We would not have it be withheld from anything we look 
upon. 
And to ensure this holy sight is ours, we offer it to everything 
we see. 
For where we see it, it will be returned to us in form of lilies 
we can lay upon our altar, making it a home for Innocence Itself, 
Who dwells in us and offers us His Holiness as ours. 
W(413) 


11-416 


1420 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 188 "The peace of God is shining in me now." 

w 188 L l. 
Why wait for Heaven? Those who seek the light are 
merely covering their eyes. 
The light is in them now. 
Enlighten¬ 
ment is but a recognition, not a change at all. 
Light is not of the 
world, yet you who bear the light in you are alien here as well. 
The 
light came with you from your native home, and stayed with you 
because it is your own. 
It is the only thing you bring with you from 
Him Who is your Source. 
It shines in you because it lights your 
home, and leads you back to where it came from and you are at 
home. 


W 188 L 2. 
This light can not be lost. 
Why wait to find it in the future, 
or believe it has been lost already or was never there? It can so eas¬ 
ily be looked upon that arguments which prove it is not there be¬ 
come ridiculous. 
Who can deny the presence of what he beholds in 
him? It is not difficult to look within, for there all vision starts. 


There is no sight, be it of dreams or from a truer source, that is not 
but the shadow of the seen through inward vision. 
There percep¬ 
tion starts and there it ends. 
It has no source but this. 


W 188 L 3. 
The peace of God is shining in you now, and from your 
heart extends around the world. 
It pauses to caress each living 
thing, and leave a blessing with it which remains forever and for¬ 
ever. 
What it gives must be eternal. 
It removes all thoughts of the 
ephemeral and valueless. 
It brings renewal to all tired hearts, and 
lights all vision as it passes by. 
All of its gifts are given everyone, 
and everyone unites in giving thanks to you who give and you who 
have received. 


W 188 L 4. 
The shining in your mind reminds the world of what it has 
forgotten, and the world restores the memory to you as well. 
From 
you salvation radiates with gifts beyond all measure, given and re¬ 
turned. 
To you, the giver of the gift, does God Himself give thanks. 

And in His blessing does the light in you shine brighter, adding to 
the gifts you have to offer to the world. 
W(414) 


1421 


11-417 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


w 188 L 5. 
The peace of God can never be contained. 
Who recognizes 
it within himself must give it. 
And the means for giving it are in his 
understanding. 
He forgives because he recognized the truth in him. 

The peace of God is shining in you now, and in all living things. 
In 
quietness is it acknowledged universally. 
For what your inward 
vision looks upon is your perception of the universe. 


W 188 L 6. 
Sit quietly and close your eyes. 
The light within you is 
sufficient. 
It alone has power to give the gift of sight to you. 
Ex¬ 
clude the outer world, and let your thoughts fly to the peace within. 

They know the way. 
For honest thoughts, untainted by the dream 
of worldly things outside yourself, become the holy messengers of 
God Himself. 
These thoughts you think with Him. 
They recognize 
their home. 
And they point surely to their Source, where God the 
Father and the Son are One. 


W 188 L 7. 
God's peace is shining on them, but they must remain 
with you as well, for they were born within your mind, as yours 
was born in God's. 
They lead you back to peace, from where they 
came but to remind you how you must return. 
They heed your Fa¬ 
ther's Voice when you refuse to listen. 
And they urge you gently to 
accept His Word for what you are, instead of fantasies and shadows. 

They remind you that you are the co-creator of all things that live. 

For as the peace of God is shining in you, it must shine on them. 


W 188 L 8. 
We practice coming nearer to the light in us today. 
We 
take our wandering thoughts, and gently bring them back to where 
they fall in line with all the thoughts we share with God. 
We will 
not let them stray. 
We let the light within our minds direct them to 
come home. 
We have betrayed them, ordering that they depart 
from us. 
But now we call them back, and W(415) wash them clean of 
strange desires and disordered wishes. 
We restore to them the holi¬ 
ness of their inheritance. 


W 188 L 9. 
Thus are our minds restored with them, and we acknowl¬ 
edge that the peace of God still shines in us, and from us to all living 
things that share our life. 
We will forgive them all, absolving all the 
world of what we thought it did to us. 
For it is we who make the 


11-418 


1422 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


world as we would have it. 
Now we choose that it be innocent, de¬ 
void of sin, and open to salvation. 
And we lay our saving blessing 
on it as we say: 

"The peace of God is shining in me now. 


Let all things shine upon me in that peace, 

And let me bless them with the light in me." W(416) 


1423 


11-419 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 189 "I feel the Love of God within me now." 

W 189 L 1 . 
There is a light in you the world can not perceive. 
And 
with its eyes you will not see this light, for you are blinded by the 
world. 
Yet you have eyes to see it. 
It is there for you to look upon. 


It was not placed in you to be kept hidden from your sight. 
This 
light is a reflection of the thought we practice now. 
To feel the Love 
of God within you is to see the world anew, shining in innocence, 
alive with hope, and blessed with perfect charity and love, 
w 189 L 2. 
Who could feel fear in such a world as this? It welcomes 
you, rejoices that you came, and sings your praises as it keeps you 
safe from every form of danger and of pain. 
It offers you a warm 
and gentle home in which to stay a while. 
It blesses you throughout 
the day, and watches through the night as silent guardian of your 
holy sleep. 
It sees salvation in you, and protects the light in you in 
which it sees its own. 
It offers you its flowers and its snow in thank¬ 
fulness for your benevolence. 


w 189 L 3. 
This is the world the Love of God reveals. 
It is so different 
from the world you see through darkened eyes of malice and of fear 
that one belies the other. 
Only one can be perceived at all. 
The 
other one is wholly meaningless. 
A world in which forgiveness 
shines on everything and peace offers its gentle light to everyone is 
inconceivable to those who see a world of hatred, rising from attack, 
poised to avenge, to murder and destroy. 


W 189 L 4. 
Yet is the world of hatred equally unseen and inconceiv¬ 
able to those who feel God's Love in them. 
Their world reflects the 
quietness and peace that shines in them; the gentleness and inno¬ 
cence they see surrounding them; the joy with which they look out 
from the endless wells of joy within. 
What they have felt in them 
they look upon, and see Its sure reflection everywhere. 
W(417) 

W 189 L 5. 
What would you see? The choice is given you. 
But learn 
and do not let your mind forget this law of seeing: You will look 
upon that which you feel within. 
If hatred finds a place within your 
heart, you will perceive a fearful world, held cruelly in death's 


11-420 


1424 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


sharp-pointed, bony fingers. 
If you feel the Love of God within you, 
you look out upon a world of mercy and of love, 
w 189 L 6. 
Today we pass illusions as we seek to reach to what is true 
in us, and feel Its all-embracing tenderness. 
Its Love Which knows 
us perfect as Itself, Its sight which is the gift Its Love bestows on us. 

We learn the way today. 
It is as sure as Love Itself, to Which it car¬ 
ries us. 
For its simplicity avoids the snares the foolish convolutions 
of the world's apparent reasoning but serve to hide. 


W 189 L 7. 
Simply do this: Be still and lay aside all thoughts of what 
you are and what God is; all concepts you have learned about the 
world; all images you hold about yourself. 
Empty your mind of 
everything it thinks is either true or false or good or bad; of every 
thought it judges worthy and all the ideas of which it is ashamed. 

Hold onto nothing. 
Do not bring with you one thought the past has 
taught, nor one belief you ever learned before from anything. 
For¬ 
get this world, forget this course, and come with wholly empty 
hands unto your God. 


w 189 L 8. 
Is it not He Who knows the way to you? You need not 
know the way to Him . 
562 Your part is simply to allow all obstacles 
that 563 you have interposed between the Son and God the Father to 
be quietly removed forever. 
God will do His part in joyful and im¬ 
mediate response. 
Ask and receive. 
But do not make demands, nor 
point the road to God by which He should appear to you. 
The way 
to reach Him is merely to let Him be. 
For in that way is your reality 
acclaimed as well. 
W(418) 

w 189 L 9. 
And so today we do not choose the way in which we go to 
Him. 
But we do choose to let Him come, and 564 with this choice we 
rest. 
And in our quiet hearts and open minds His Love will blaze Its 
pathway of Itself. 
What has not been denied is surely there, if it be 
true, and can be surely reached. 
God knows His Son, and knows 

' John 14:5 Thomas said to Him, "Lord, we do not know where You are going, and how can we know 
the way?” 

563 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 


564 The Urtext manuscript originally has a new sentence starting with “And” while handwritten editing 
changes that to a comma, which we think is preferable. 



1425 


11-421 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


the way to him. 
He does not need His Son to show Him how to find 
His way. 
Through every opened door His Love shines outward 
from Its home within, and lightens up the world in innocence. 


w 189 L 10 . 
Father, we do not know the way to You. 
But we have 
called and You have answered us. 
We will not interfere. 
Salvation's 
ways are not our own for they belong to You, and 5 * 55 it is unto You 
we look for them. 
Our hands are open to receive Your gifts. 
We 
have no thoughts we think apart from You, and cherish no beliefs of 
what we are or who created us. 
Yours is the way that we would 
find and follow. 
And we ask but that Your Will, Which is our own 
as well, be done in us and in the world, that it becomes a part of 
Heaven now . 
566 Amen. 
W(419) 


565 As with the preceding note, the Urtext manuscript originally has a new sentence starting with "And” 
here while handwritten editing changes that to a comma, which we think is preferable 

566 Matthew 6:10 “Your kingdom come. 
Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.” 


11-422 


1426 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 190 "I choose the joy of God instead of pain." 

W 190 L 1 . 
Pain is a wrong perspective. 
When it is experienced in any 
form, it is a proof of self-deception. 
It is not a fact at all. 
There is no 
form it takes which will not disappear if seen aright. 
For pain pro¬ 
claims God cruel. 
How could it be real in any form? It witnesses to 
God the Father's hatred of His Son, the sinfulness He sees in him, 
and His insane desire for revenge and death. 


w 190 L 2. 
Can such projections be attested to? Can they be anything 
but wholly false? Pain is but witness to the Son's mistakes in what 
he thinks he is. 
It is a dream of fierce retaliation for a crime that 
could not be committed; for attack on what is wholly unassailable. 


It is a nightmare of abandonment by an Eternal Love Which could 
not leave the Son whom It created out of love. 


W 190 L 3. 
Pain is a sign illusions reign in place of truth. 
It demon¬ 
strates God is denied, confused with fear, perceived as mad and 
seen as traitor to Himself. 
If God is real there is no pain. 
If pain is 
real there is no God. 
For vengeance is not part of love , 567 and fear, 
denying love and using pain to prove that God is dead, has shown 
that death is victor over life. 
The body is the Son of God, corruptible 
in death, as mortal as the Father he has slain. 


w 190 L 4. 
Peace to such foolishness! The time has come to laugh at 
such insane ideas. 
There is no need to think of them as savage 
crimes or secret sins with weighty consequence. 
Who but a mad¬ 
man could conceive of them as cause of anything? Their witness, 
pain, is mad as they, and no more to be feared than the insane illu¬ 
sions which it shields and tries to demonstrate must still be true. 

W(420) 

w 190 L 5. 
It is your thoughts alone that cause you pain. 
Nothing ex¬ 
ternal to your mind can hurt or injure you in any way. 
There is no 
cause beyond yourself that can reach down and bring oppression. 

No-one but yourself affects you. 
There is nothing in the world 
which has the power to make you ill or sad, or weak or frail. 
But it 


367 Urtext manuscript has over-striking indicating a sentence break ... 
but one is not required. 



1427 


11-423 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


is you who have the power to dominate all things you see by merely 
recognizing what you are. 
As you perceive the harmlessness in 
them, they will accept your holy will as theirs. 
And what was seen 
as fearful now becomes a source of innocence and holiness, 
w 190 L 6. 
My holy brothers, think of this awhile; the world you see 
does nothing. 
It has no effects at all. 
It merely represents your 
thoughts. 
And it will change entirely as you elect to change your 
mind, and choose the joy of God as what you really want. 
Your Self 
is radiant in this holy joy, unchanged, unchanging and unchange¬ 
able forever and forever. 
And would you deny a little corner of 
your mind its own inheritance, and keep it as a hospital for pain, a 
sickly place where living things must come at last to die? 

w 190 L 7. 
Tire world may seem to cause you pain. 
And yet the 
world, as causeless, has no power to cause. 
As an effect it cannot 
make effects. 
As an illusion it is what you will. 
Your idle wishes 
represent its pains. 
Your strange desires bring it evil dreams. 
Your 
thoughts of death envelop it in fear, while in your kind forgiveness 
does it live. 


W 190 L 8. 
Pain is the thought of evil taking form, and working havoc 
in your holy mind. 
Pain is the ransom you have gladly paid not to 
be free. 
In pain is God denied the Son He loves. 
In pain does fear 
appear to triumph over love, and time replace eternity and Heaven. 

And the world becomes a cruel and a bitter place, where sorrow 
rules and little joys give way before the onslaught of the savage pain 
that waits to end all joy in misery. 
W(421) 

W 190 L 9. 
Lay down your arms and come without defense into the 
quiet place where Heaven's peace holds all things still at last. 
Lay 
down all thoughts of danger and of fear. 
Let no attack enter with 
you. 
Lay down the cruel sword of judgment that you hold against 
your throat, and put aside the withering assaults with which you 
seek to hide your holiness. 


w 190 L 10. 
Here will you understand there is no pain. 
Here does the 
joy of God belong to you. 
This is the day when it is given you to 
realize the lesson which contains all of salvation's power. 
It is this: 


11-424 


1428 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Pain is illusion; joy reality. 
Pain is but sleep; joy is awakening. 
Pain 
is deception; joy alone is truth. 


W 190 L 11. 
And so again we make the only choice that ever can be 
made; we choose between illusions and the truth, or pain and joy, or 
hell and Heaven. 
Let our gratitude unto our Teacher fill our hearts 
as we are free to choose our joy instead of pain, our holiness in place 
of sin, the peace of God instead of conflict, and the light of Heaven 
for the darkness of the world. 
W(422) 


1429 


11-425 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 191 "I am the holy Son of God Himself" 

w 191L l. 
Here is your declaration of release from bondage of the 
world. 
And here as well is all the world released. 
You do not see 
what you have done by giving to the world the role of jailor to the 
Son of God. 
What could it be but vicious and afraid, fearful of 
shadows, punitive and wild, lacking all reason, blind, insane and 


sad? 


w 191L 2. 
What have you done that this should be your world? 

What have you done that this is what you see? Deny your own 
identity and this is what remains. 
You look on chaos and proclaim 
it as yourself. 
There is no sight that fails to witness this to you. 

There is no sound that does not speak of frailty within you and 
without; no breath you draw that does not seem to bring you nearer 
death; no hope you hold but will dissolve in tears. 


W 191 L 3. 
Deny your own identity and you will not escape the mad¬ 
ness which induced this weird, unnatural and ghostly thought 
which 568 mocks creation and which 569 laughs at God. 
Deny your 
own identity and you assail the universe alone, without a friend, a 
tiny particle of dust against the legions of your enemies. 
Deny your 
own identity and look on evil, sin and death, and 570 watch despair 
snatch from your fingers every scrap of hope, leaving you nothing 
but the wish to die. 


w 191L 4. 
Yet what is it except a game you play in which identity 
can be denied? You are as God created you. 
All else but this one 
thing is folly to believe. 
In this one thought is everything 571 set free. 

In this one truth are all illusions gone. 
In this one fact is sinlessness 
proclaimed to be forever part of everything; the central core of its 
existence and its guarantee of immortality. 
W(423) 


568 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


569 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


570 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here, but the handwrittm markup changes it to a comma 
which we agree is preferable. 


371 Handwritten mark-up suggests (everyone). 



11-426 


1430 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 191L 5. 
But let today's idea find a place among your thoughts, and 
you have risen far above the world and all the worldly thoughts that 
hold it prisoner. 
And from this place of safety and escape you will 
return and set it free. 
For he who can accept his true identity is truly 
saved. 
And his salvation is the gift he gives to everyone in gratitude 
to Him Who pointed out the way to happiness that changed his 
whole perception of the world. 


w 191L 6. 
One holy thought like this and you are free; you are the 
holy Son of God Himself. 
And with this holy thought you learn as 
well that you have freed the world. 
You have no need to use it cru¬ 
elly and then perceive this savage need in it. 
You set it free of your 
imprisonment. 
You will not see a devastating image of yourself 
walking the world in terror, with the world twisting in agony be¬ 
cause your fears have laid the mark of death upon its heart, 
w 191L 7. 
Be glad today how very easily is hell undone. 
You need 
but tell yourself: 

"I am the holy Son of God Himself. 


I cannot suffer; cannot be in pain; 

I cannot lose, nor can I fail to do 

All that salvation asks." 

And in that thought is everything you look on wholly changed. 


W 191 L 8. 
A miracle has lighted up all dark and ancient caverns 
where the rites of death echoed since time began. 
For time has lost 
its hold upon the world. 
The Son of God has come in glory to re¬ 
deem the lost, to save the helpless and to give the world the gift of 
his forgiveness. 
572 Who could see the world as dark and sinful when 
God's Son has come again at last to set it free? W(424) 
w 191L 9. 
You who perceive yourself as weak and frail, with futile 
hopes and devastated dreams, born but to die, to weep and suffer 


~ 7 ~ Matthew 16:27 “For the Son of Man will come in the glory of His Father with His angels, and then 
He will reward each according to his works.” 

Matthew 18:11 “For the Son of Man has come to save that which was lost.” 

Matthew 25:31 “When the Son of Man comes in His glory, and all the holy angels with Him, then He 
will sit on the throne of His glory.” 


1431 

PROOF COPY 


11-427 



Part 1 


pain, hear this: All power is given you in earth and Heaven. 
573 There 
is nothing that you cannot do. 
574 You play the game of death, of be¬ 
ing helpless, pitifully tied to dissolution in a world which shows no 
mercy to you. 
Yet when you accord it mercy, will its mercy shine on 
you. 


w 191L 10. 
Then let the Son of God awaken from his sleep, and open¬ 
ing his holy eyes return again to bless the world he made. 
In error it 
began. 
But it will end in the reflection of his holiness. 
And we will 
sleep no more and dream of death. 
Then join with me today. 
Your 
glory is the light that saves the world. 
Do not withhold salvation 
longer. 
Look about the world and see the suffering there. 
Is not 
your heart willing to bring your weary brothers rest? 

w 191L 11 . 
They must await your own release. 
They stay in chains 
'til you are free. 
They cannot see the mercy of the world until you 
find it for 575 yourself. 
They suffer pain until you have denied its 
hold on you. 
They die'til you accept your own Eternal Life. 
You 
are the holy Son of God Himself. 
Remember this and all the world 
is free. 
Remember this and earth and Heaven are one. 
W(425) 


573 Matthew 28:18 And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, “All authority has been given to Me in 
heaven and on earth.” 

574 Matthew 17:20 So Jesus said to them, “Because of your unbelief; for assuredly, I say to you, if you 
have faith as a mustard seed, you will say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move; 
and nothing will be impossible for you.” 

John 14:12 “Truly, truly, I say to you, He who believes on Me, the works that I do he shall do also, 
and greater works than these he shall do, because I go to My Father.” 

575 Handwritten mark-up suggests (in) in place of “for”. 



11-428 


1432 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 192 "I have a function God would have me fill." 

W 192 L 1 . 
It is your Father's holy Will that you complete Himself and 
that your Self shall be His sacred Son, forever pure as He, of love 
created and in love preserved, extending love, creating in its Name, 
forever one with God and with your Self. 
Yet what can such a func¬ 
tion mean within a world of envy, hatred and attack? 

W 192 L 2. 
Therefore you have a function in the world in its own 
terms. 
For who can understand a language far beyond his simple 
grasp? Forgiveness represents your function here. 
It is not God's 
creation, for it is the means by which untruth can be undone. 
And 
who would pardon Heaven? Yet on earth you need the means to let 
illusion go. 
Creation merely waits for your return to be acknowl¬ 
edged, not to be complete. 


W 192 L 3. 
Creation cannot even be conceived of in the world. 
It has 
no meaning here. 
Forgiveness is the closest it can come to earth. 


For being Heaven-borne, it has no form at all. 
Yet God created One 
Who has the power to translate into 576 form the wholly formless. 

What He makes are dreams, but of a kind so close to waking that the 
light of day already shines in them, 577 and eyes already opening be¬ 
hold the joyful sights their offerings contain. 


W 192 L 4. 
Forgiveness gently looks upon all things unknown in 
Heaven, sees them disappear, and leaves the world a clean and un¬ 
marked slate on which the Word of God can now replace the sense¬ 
less symbols written there before. 
Forgiveness is the means by 
which the fear of death is overcome because it holds no fierce attrac¬ 
tion now, and guilt is gone. 
W(426) Forgiveness lets the body be per¬ 
ceived as what it is; a simple teaching aid to be laid by when learn¬ 
ing is complete, but hardly changing him who learns at all. 


W 192 L 5. 
The mind without the body cannot make mistakes. 
It can¬ 
not think that it will die, nor be the prey of merciless attack. 
Anger 


576 Handwritten mark-up suggests (in) in place of “into”. 


377 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here, but the handwriting changes it to a comma which 
we agree is preferable. 



1433 


11-429 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


becomes impossible, and where is terror then? What fears could 
still assail those who have lost the source of all attack; the core of 
anguish and the seat 578 of fear? Only forgiveness can relieve the 
mind of thinking that the body is its home. 
Only forgiveness can 
restore the peace that God intended for His holy Son. 
Only forgive¬ 
ness can persuade the Son to look again upon his holiness, 
w 192 L 6. 
With anger gone, you will indeed perceive that for Christ's 
vision and the gift of sight no sacrifice was asked, and only pain was 
lifted from a sick and tortured mind. 
Is this unwelcome? Is it to be 
feared? Or is it to be hoped for, met with thanks and joyously ac¬ 
cepted? We are one, and therefore give up nothing, for 579 we have 
indeed been given everything by God. 


w 192 L 7. 
Yet do we need forgiveness to perceive that this is so. 

Without its kindly light we grope in darkness, using reason but to 
justify our rage and our attack. 
Our understanding is so limited that 
what we think we understand is but confusion born of error. 
We 
are lost in mists of shifting dreams and fearful thoughts, our eyes 
shut tight against the light; our minds engaged in worshipping what 
is not there. 


W 192 L 8. 
Who can be born again in Christ but him who has forgiven 
everyone he sees or thinks of or imagines? 580 Who could be set free 
while he imprisons anyone? A jailor is not free, for he is bound to¬ 
gether with his prisoner. 
He must be sure that he does not escape, 
and so he spends his time in keeping watch on him. 
The bars which 
limit him become the world in which the 581 jailor lives, along with 
him. 
And it is on his freedom that the way to liberty depends for 
both of them. 
W(427) 


57! ’ In the Urtext manuscript “deceit” appears here, with (the seat) handwritten in. 
We’ve adopted the 
handwritten correction because in the context it appears more likely to be the intended meaning. 


579 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break, and “But” instead of “for”. 
This appears to be the 
correction of a typing error. 


580 John 3:3 Jesus answered and said to him, “Most assuredly, I say to you, unless one is bom again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God.” 

581 Handwritten mark-up suggests (his). 



11-430 


1434 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


w 192 L 9. 
Therefore hold no-one prisoner. 
Release instead of bind, 
for thus are you made free. 
582 The way is simple. 
Every time 583 you 
feel a stab of anger, realize you hold a sword above your head. 
And 
it will fall or be averted as you choose to be condemned or free. 


Thus does each one who seems to tempt you to be angry represent 
your Savior from the prison-house of death. 
And so you owe him 
thanks instead of pain. 


w 192 L 10. 
Be merciful today. 
The Son of God deserves your mercy. 

It is he who asks that you accept the way to freedom now. 
Deny 
him not. 
His Father's Love for him belongs to you. 
Your function 
here on earth is only to forgive him, that you may accept him back 
as your identity. 
He is as God created him. 
And you are what he is. 

Forgive him now his sins, and you will see that you are one with 
him. 
W(428) 


582 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 

583 Originally in the Urtext manuscript typed as one words, “everytime”. 



1435 


11-431 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 193 "All things areLessons God would have me 
learn." 

w 193 L l. 
God does not know of learning. 
Yet His Will extends to 
what He does not understand, in that He wills the happiness His 
Son inherited of Him be undisturbed; eternal and forever gaining 
scope, eternally expanding in the joy of full creation, and eternally 
open and wholly limitless in Him. 
This is His Will. 
And thus His 
Will provides the means to guarantee that it is done. 


w 193 L 2. 
God sees no contradictions. 
Yet His Son believes he sees 
them. 
Thus he has a need for One Who can correct his erring sight, 
and give him vision that will lead him back to where perception 
ceases. 
God does not perceive at all. 
Yet it is He Who gives the 
means by which perception is made true and beautiful enough to let 
the light of Heaven shine upon it. 
It is He Who answers what His 
Son would contradict, and keeps his sinlessness forever safe, 
w 193 L 3. 
These are the lessons God would have you learn. 
His Will 
reflects them all, and they reflect His loving kindness to the Son He 
loves. 
Each lesson has a central thought, the same in all of them. 


The form alone is changed, with different circumstances and events; 
with different characters and different themes apparent but not real. 

They are the same in fundamental content. 
It is this: "Forgive and 
you will see this differently." 

W 193 L 4. 
Certain it is that all distress does not appear to be but un¬ 
forgiveness. 
Yet that is the content underneath the form. 
It is this 
sameness which makes learning sure, because the lesson is so sim¬ 
ple that it cannot be rejected in the end. 
No-one can hide forever 
from a truth so very obvious that it appears in countless forms, and 
yet is recognized as easily in all of them, if one but wants to see the 
simple lesson there. 
W(429) 

w 193 L 5. 
"Forgive and you will see this differently." These are the 
words the Holy Spirit speaks in all your tribulations, all your pain, 
all suffering regardless of its forms. 
These are the words with which 
temptation ends and guilt, abandoned, is revered no more. 
These 


11-432 


1436 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


are the words which end the dream of sin, and rid the mind of fear. 

These are the words by which salvation comes to all the world, 
w 193 L 6. 
Shall we not learn to say these words when we are 
tempted to believe that pain is real, and death becomes our choice 
instead of life? Shall we not learn to say these words when we have 
understood their power to release all minds from bondage? These 
are words which give you power over all events which 584 seem to 
have been given power over you. 
You see them rightly when you 
hold these words in full awareness, and do not forget these words 
apply to everything you see or any brother looks upon amiss, 
w 193 L 7. 
How can you tell when you are seeing wrong, or someone 
else is failing to perceive the lesson he should learn? Does pain 
seem real in the perception? If it does, be sure the lesson is not 
learned. 
And there remains an unforgiveness hiding in the mind 
which 585 sees the pain through eyes the mind directs. 


w 193 L 8. 
God would not have you suffer thus. 
He would help you 
forgive yourself. 
His Son does not remember who he is. 
And God 
would have him not forget His Love, and all the gifts His Love 
brings with It. 
Would you now renounce your own salvation? 
Would you fail to learn the simple lessons Heaven's Teacher sets 
before you that all pain may disappear, and God may be remem¬ 
bered by His Son? 

w 193 L 9. 
All things are lessons God would have you learn. 
He 
would not leave an unforgiving thought without correction, nor one 
thorn or nail to hurt His sacred Son in any way. 
He would ensure 
his holy rest remain untroubled and serene, without a care in an 
eternal home which cares for him. 
And He would have all tears be 
wiped away, with none remaining yet unshed, and none but wait¬ 
ing their appointed time to fall. 
For God has willed that laughter 
W(430) should replace each one, and that His Son be free again. 



384 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 

383 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



1437 


11-433 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


w 193 L 10. 
We will attempt today to overcome a thousand seeming 
obstacles to peace in just one day. 
Let mercy come to you more 
quickly. 
Do not try to hold it off another day, another minute, or 
another instant. 
Time was made for this. 
Use it today for what its 
purpose is. 
Morning and night devote what time you can to serve 
its proper aim, and do not let the time be less than meets your deep¬ 
est need. 
Give all you can and give a little more, for now we would 
arise in haste and go unto our Father's house. 
586 We have been gone 
too long, and we would linger here no more. 


w 193 L 11 . 
And as we practice, let us think about all things we saved 
to settle by ourselves, and kept apart from healing. 
Let us give them 
all to Him Who knows the way to look upon them so that they will 
disappear. 
Truth is His message; truth His teaching is. 
His are the 
lessons God would have us learn. 


W 193 L 12. 
Each hour spend a little time today, and in the days to 
come, in practicing the lesson in forgiveness in the form established 
for the day. 
And try to give it application to the happenings the 
hour brought, so that the next one is free of the one before. 
The 
chains of time are easily unloosened in this way. 
Let no one hour 
cast its shadow on the one that follows, and when that one goes let 
everything that happened in its course go with it. 
Thus will you 
remain unbound, in peace eternal in the world of time. 


w 193 L 13. 
This is the lesson God would have you learn: There is a 
way to look on everything that lets it be to you another step to Him 
and to salvation of the world. 
W(43l) To all that speaks of terror, an¬ 
swer thus: 

"I will forgive and this will disappear.” 

To every apprehension, every care, and every form of suffering re¬ 
peat these selfsame words. 
And then you hold the key that opens 


586 Matthew 19:21 Jesus said to him, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have and give to the 
poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow Me.” 

John 14:2 “In My Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. 
I go to 
prepare a place for you.” 


11-434 


1438 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Heaven's gate, 587 and brings the Love of God the Father down to 
earth at last, to raise it up to Heaven. 
God will take this final step 

Himself. 
Do not deny the little steps He asks you take to Him. 


W(432) 

Lesson 194 "I place the future in the hands of God." 

W 194 L 1. 
Today's idea takes another step toward quick salvation, 
and a giant stride it is indeed! So great the distance is that it encom¬ 
passes, it sets you down just short of Heaven, with the goal in sight 
and obstacles behind. 
Your foot has reached the lawns that wel¬ 
come you to Heaven's gate; the quiet place of peace where you 
await with certainty the final step of God. 
How far are we progress¬ 
ing now from earth! How close are we approaching to our goal! 
How short the journey still to be pursued! 

w 194 L 2. 
Accept today's idea, and you have passed 588 all anxiety, all 
pits of hell, all blackness of depression, thoughts of sin, and devasta¬ 
tion brought about by guilt. 
Accept today's idea, and you have re¬ 
leased the world from all imprisonment by loosening the heavy 
chains that locked the door to freedom on it. 
You are saved, and 
your salvation thus becomes the gift you give the world because you 
have received. 


W 194 L 3. 
In no one instant is depression felt, or pain experienced, or 
loss perceived. 
In no one instant sorrow can be set upon a throne 
and worshipped faithfully. 
In no one instant can one even die. 
And 
so each instant given unto God in passing, with the next one given 
Him already, is a time of your release from sadness, pain, and even 
death itself. 


w 194 L 4. 
God holds your future as He holds your past and present. 

They are one to Him, and so they should be one to you. 
Yet in this 
world the temporal progression still seems real. 
And so you are not 
asked to understand the lack of sequence really found in time. 
You 


Matthew 16:19 And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven. 


588 Urtext manuscript has “past”, obviously a spelling error. 
In the Notes it is as we have it, “passed.” 
FIP also corrects it. 



1439 


11-435 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


are but asked to let the future go, and place it in God's hands. 
And 
you will see by your experience that you have laid the past and pre¬ 
sent in His hands as well, because the past will punish you no more, 
and future dread will now be meaningless. 
W(433) 

w 194 L 5. 
Release the future. 
For the past is gone, and what is pre¬ 
sent, freed from its bequest of grief and misery, of pain and loss, be¬ 
comes the instant in which time escapes the bondage of illusions 
where it runs its pitiless, inevitable course. 
Then is each instant, 
which was slave to time, transformed into a holy instant when the 
light that was kept hidden in God's Son is freed to bless the world. 

Now is he free, and all his glory shines upon a world made free with 
him, to share his holiness. 


w 194 L 6. 
If you can see the lesson for today as the deliverance it 
really is, you will not hesitate to give as much consistent effort as 
you can to make it be a part of you. 
As it becomes a thought 
which 589 rules your mind, a habit in your problem-solving reper¬ 
toire, a way of quick reaction to temptation, you extend your learn¬ 
ing to the world. 
And as you learn to see salvation in all things, so 
will the world perceive that it is saved. 


w 194 L 7. 
What worry can beset the one who gives his future to the 
loving hands of God? What can he suffer? What can cause him 
pain, or bring experience of loss to him? What can he fear? And 
what can he regard except with love? For he who has escaped all 
fear of future pain has found his way to present peace, and certainty 
of care the world can never threaten. 
He is sure that his perception 
may be faulty, but will never lack correction. 
He is free to choose 
again when he has been deceived; to change his mind when he has 
made mistakes. 


w 194 L 8. 
Place, then, your future in the hands of God. 
For thus you 
call the memory of Him to come again, replacing all your thoughts 
of sin and evil with the truth of love. 
Think you the world could fail 
to gain thereby, and every living creature not respond with healed 


389 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 



11-436 


1440 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


perception? Who entrusts himself to God has also placed the world 
within the Hands to which he has himself appealed for comfort and 
security. 
He lays aside the sick illusions of the world along with his, 
and offers peace to both. 
W(434) 

w 194 L 9. 
Now are we saved indeed. 
For in God's hands we rest un¬ 
troubled, sure that only good can come to us. 
If we forget, we will 
be gently reassured. 
If we accept an unforgiving thought, it will be 
seen replaced by love's reflection. 
And if we are tempted to attack, 
we will appeal to Him Who guards our rest to make the choice for 
us that leaves temptation far behind. 
No longer is the world our 
enemy, for we have chosen that we be its friends. 
590 W(435) 


590 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Friend) instead of “friends”. 



1441 


11-437 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 195 "Love is the way I walk in gratitude." 

W 195 L 1 . 
Gratitude is a lesson hard to learn for those who look 
upon the world amiss. 
The most 591 they can do is see themselves as 
better off than others. 
And they try to be content because another 
seems to suffer more than they. 
How pitiful and deprecating are 
such thoughts! For who has cause for thanks while others have less 
cause? And who could suffer less because he sees another suffer 
more? Your gratitude is due to Him alone Who made all cause of 
sorrow disappear throughout the world. 


w 195 L 2. 
It is insane to offer thanks because of suffering. 
But it is 
equally insane to fail in gratitude to One Who offers you the certain 
means whereby all pain is healed, and suffering replaced with 
laughter and with happiness. 
Nor could the even partly sane refuse 
to take the steps which He directs, and follow in the way He sets 
before them to escape a prison which they thought contained no 
door to the deliverance they now perceive. 


w 195 L 3. 
Your brother is your "enemy" because you see in him the 
rival for your peace; a plunderer who takes his joy from you, and 
leaves you nothing 

but a black despair so bitter and relentless that there is no hope re¬ 
maining. 
Now is vengeance all there is to wish for. 
Now can you 
but try to bring him down to lie in death with you, as useless as 
yourself; as little left within his grasping fingers as in yours. 


w 195 L 4. 
You do not offer God your gratitude because your brother 
is more slave than you, nor could you sanely be enraged if he seems 
freer. 
Love makes no comparisons. 
And gratitude can only be sin¬ 
cere if it is joined to love. 
We offer thanks to God our Father that in 
us all things will find their freedom. 
It will never be that some are 
loosed while others still are bound, 592 for who can bargain in the 
Name of love? W(436) 


591 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


592 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 


11-438 


1442 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


W 195 L 5. 
Therefore give thanks, but in sincerity. 
And let your grati¬ 
tude make room for all who will escape with you; the sick, the weak, 
the needy and afraid, and those who mourn a seeming loss or feel 
apparent pain, who suffer cold or hunger, or who walk the way of 
hatred and the path of death. 
All these go with you. 
Let us not 
compare ourselves with them, for thus we split them off in our 
awareness from the Unity we share with them, 593 as they must share 
with us. 


w 195 L 6. 
We thank our Father for one thing alone; that we are sepa¬ 
rate from no living thing, and therefore one with Him. 
And we re¬ 
joice that no exceptions ever can be made which would reduce our 
wholeness, nor impair or change our function to complete the One 
Who is Himself completion. 
We give thanks for every living thing, 
for otherwise we offer thanks for nothing, and we fail to recognize 
the gifts of God to us. 


W 195 L 7. 
Then let our brothers lean their tired heads against our 
shoulders as they rest a while. 
We offer thanks for them. 
For if we 
can direct them to the peace that we would find, the way is opening 
at last to us. 
An ancient door is swinging free again; a long forgot¬ 
ten Word re-echoes in our memory, and gathers clarity as we are 
willing once again to hear. 


w 195 L 8. 
Walk, then, in gratitude the way of love. 
For hatred is for¬ 
gotten when we lay comparisons aside. 
What more remains as ob¬ 
stacles to peace? The fear of God is now undone at last, and we for¬ 
give without comparing. 
Thus we cannot choose to overlook some 
things, and yet retain some other things still locked away as sins. 

When your forgiveness is complete you will have total gratitude, for 
you will see that everything has earned the right to love by being 
loving, even as your Self. 
W(437) 

w 195 L 9. 
Today we learn to think of gratitude in place of anger, 
malice and revenge. 
We have been given everything. 
If we refuse 


593 Handwritten mark-up edits this to: "for thus we split them off from our awareness of the unity we 
share with them.” In the Notes and the Urtext, we “split them off in our awareness from the unity, ” In 
the mark-up and FIP we “split them off from our awareness of the unity .” 


1443 


11-439 


PROOF 


COPY 






Part 1 


to recognize it, we are not entitled therefore to our bitterness, and to 
a self-perception which regards us in a place of merciless pursuit, 
where we are badgered ceaselessly and pushed about without a 
thought or care for us or for our future. 
Gratitude becomes the sin¬ 
gle thought we substitute for these insane perceptions. 
God has 
cared for us, and calls us Son. 
Can there be more than this? 

W 195 L 10. 
Our gratitude will pave the way to Him, and shorten our 
learning time by more than you could ever dream of. 
Gratitude 
goes hand in hand with love, and where one is the other must be 
found. 
For gratitude is but an aspect of the love which is the Source 
of all creation. 
God gives thanks to you. 
His Son, for being what 
you are; His Own completion and the Source of love, along with 
Him. 
Your gratitude to Him is one with His to you. 
For love can 
walk no road except the way of gratitude, and thus we go who walk 
the way to God. 
W(438) 


11-440 


PROOF 


1444 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 196 "It can be but myself I crucify." 

W 196 L 1. 
When this is firmly understood and kept in full awareness, 
you will not attempt to harm yourself, nor make your body slave to 
vengeance. 
You will not attack yourself, and you will realize that to 
attack another is but to attack yourself. 
You will be free of the in¬ 
sane belief that to attack a brother saves yourself. 
And you will un¬ 
derstand his safety is your own, and in his healing you are healed. 


W 196 L 2. 
Perhaps at first you will not understand how mercy, limit¬ 
less and with all things held in its sure protection, can be found in 
the idea we practice for today. 
It may, in fact, appear to be a sign 
that punishment can never be escaped because the ego, under what 
it sees as threat, is quick to cite the truth to save its lies. 
Yet must it 
fail to understand the truth it uses thus. 
But you can learn to see 
these foolish applications, and deny the meaning they appear to 
have. 


W 196 L 3. 
Thus do you also teach your mind that you are not an ego. 

For the ways in which the ego would distort the truth will not de¬ 
ceive you longer. 
You will not believe you are a body to be cruci¬ 
fied. 
And you will see within today's idea the light of resurrection, 
looking past all thoughts of crucifixion and of death to thoughts of 
liberation and of life. 


w 196 L 4. 
Today's idea is one step we take in leading us from bond¬ 
age to the state of perfect freedom. 
Let us take this step today that 
we may quickly go the way salvation shows us, taking every step in 
its appointed sequence as the mind relinquishes its burdens one by 
one. 
It is not time we need for this. 
It is but willingness. 
And 594 
what would seem to need a thousand years can easily be done in 
just one instant by the grace of God. 
W(439) 

w 196 L 5. 
The dreary, hopeless thought that you can make attacks on 
others and escape yourself has nailed you to the cross. 
Perhaps it 
seemed to be salvation. 
Yet it merely stood for the belief the fear of 


3,4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (For). 



1445 


11-441 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


God is real. 
And what is that but hell? Who could believe his Fa¬ 
ther is his deadly enemy, separate from him, and waiting to destroy 
his life and blot him from the universe, without the fear of hell upon 
his heart? 

w 196 L 6. 
Such is the form of madness you believe, if you accept the 
fearful thought you can attack another and be free yourself. 
Until 
this form is changed, there is no hope. 
Until you see that this, at 
least, must be entirely impossible, how could there be escape? The 
fear of God is real to anyone who thinks this thought is true. 
And 
he will not perceive its foolishness, nor even see that it is there so 
that it would be possible to question it. 


W 196 L 7. 
To question it at all, its form must first be changed at least 
as much as will permit fear of retaliation to abate, and the responsi¬ 
bility returned to some extent to you. 
From there you can at least 
consider if you want to go along this painful path. 
Until this shift 
has been accomplished, you can not perceive that it is but your 
thoughts which bring you fear, and your deliverance depends on 
you. 


w 196 L 8. 
Our next steps will be easy, if you take this one today. 

From there we go ahead quite rapidly. 
For once you understand it 
is impossible that you be hurt except by your own thoughts, the fear 
of God must disappear. 
You do not now believe that fear is caused 
without. 
And God, Whom you had thought to banish, can be wel¬ 
comed back within the holy mind Fie never left. 
W(440) 

W 196 L 9. 
Salvation's song can certainly be heard in the idea we 
practice for today. 
If it can but be you you crucify, you did not hurt 
the world and need not fear its vengeance and pursuit. 
Nor need 
you hide in terror from the deadly fear of God projection hides be¬ 
hind. 
The thing you dread the most is your salvation. 
You are 
strong, and it is strength you want. 
And you are free, and glad of 
freedom. 
You have sought to be both weak and bound, because you 
feared your strength and freedom. 
Yet salvation lies in them. 


W 196 L 10. 
There is an instant in which terror seems to grip your 
mind so wholly that escape appears quite hopeless. 
When you real- 


11-442 


1446 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


ize, once and for all, that it is you you fear, the mind perceives itself 
as split. 
And this had been concealed while you believed attack 
could be directed outward, and returned from outside to within. 
It 
seemed to be an enemy outside you had to fear. 
And thus a god 
outside yourself became your mortal enemy; the source of fear. 


W 196 L 11. 
Now, for an instant, is a murderer perceived within you, 
eager for your death, intent on plotting punishment for you until the 
time when it can kill at last. 
Yet in this instant is the time as well in 
which salvation comes. 
For fear of God has disappeared. 
And you 
can call on Him to save you from illusions in 595 His Love, calling 
Him Father and yourself His Son. 
Pray that the instant may be 
soon, - today. 
Step back from fear and make advance to love. 


w 196 L 12. 
There is no Thought of God that does not go with you to 
help you reach that instant, and to go beyond it quickly, surely and 
forever. 
When the fear of God is gone, there are no obstacles which 
still remain between you and the holy peace of God. 
How kind and 
merciful is the idea we practice! Give it welcome as you should, for 
it is your release. 
It is indeed but you your mind can try to crucify. 

Yet your redemption, too, will come from you. 
W(441) 


393 Handwritten mark-up suggests (by) in place of “in". 



1447 


11-443 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 197 "It can be but my gratitude I earn." 

w 197 L l. 
Here is the second step we take to free your mind from the 
belief in outside force pitted against your own. 
You make attempts 
at kindness and forgiveness. 
Yet you turn them to attack again, 
unless you find external gratitude and lavish thanks. 
Your gifts 
must be received with honor, lest they be withdrawn. 
And so you 
think God's gifts are loans at best; at worst, deceptions which would 
cheat you of defenses to ensure that when He strikes He will not fail 


to kill. 



w 197 L 2. 
How easily are God and guilt confused by those who 
know not what their thoughts can do. 
Deny your strength, and 
weakness must become salvation to you. 
See yourself as bound, 
and bars become your home. 
Nor will you leave the prison house or 
claim your strength until guilt and salvation are not seen as one, and 
freedom and salvation are perceived as joined, with strength beside 
them, to be sought and claimed and found and fully recognized. 


W 197 L 3. 
Tire world must thank you when you offer it release from 
your illusions. 
Yet your thanks belong to you as well, for its release 
can only mirror yours. 
Your gratitude is all your gifts require, that 
they be a lasting offering of a thankful heart released from hell for¬ 
ever. 
Is it this you would undo by taking back your gifts because 
they were not honored? It is you who honor them and give them 
fitting thanks, for it is you who have received the gifts. 


W 197 L 4. 
It does not matter if another thinks your gifts unworthy. 


In his mind there is a part which joins with yours in thanking you. 


It does not matter if your gifts seem lost and ineffectual. 
They are 
received where they are given. 
In your gratitude are they accepted 
universally, and thankfully acknowledged by the Heart of God 
Himself. 
And would you take them back, when He has gratefully 
accepted them? W(442) 

w 197 L 5. 
God blesses every gift you give to Him and every gift is 
given Him because it can be given only to yourself, and what be¬ 
longs to God must be His Own. 
Yet you will never realize His gifts 


11-444 


1448 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


are sure, eternal, changeless, limitless, forever giving out, extending 
love and adding to your never-ending joy, while you forgive but to 
attack again. 


W 197 L 6. 
Withdraw the gifts you give, and you will think that what 
is given you has been withdrawn. 
But learn to let forgiveness take 
away the sins you think you see outside yourself, and you can never 
think the gifts of God are lent but for a little while, before He 
snatches them away again in death. 
For death will have no meaning 
for you then. 
And with the end of this belief is fear forever over. 

Thank your Self for this, for He is grateful only unto God, and He 
gives thanks for you unto Himself. 


w 197 L 7. 
To everyone who lives will Christ yet come, for everyone 
must live and breathe in Him . 
596 His Being in His Father is secure 
because Their Will is One. 
Their gratitude to all They have created 
has no end, for gratitude remains a part of love. 
Thanks be to you, 
the holy Son of God, for as you were created you contain all things 
within your Self. 
And you are still as God created you. 
Nor can you 
dim the light of your perfection. 
In your heart the Heart of God is 
laid. 
He holds you dear because you are Himself. 
All gratitude be¬ 
longs to you because of what you are. 


w 197 L 8. 
Give thanks as you receive it. 
Be you free of all ingrati¬ 
tude to anyone who makes your Self complete. 
And from this Self is 
no-one left outside. 
Give thanks for all the countless channels that 
extend this Self. 
All that you do is given unto Him. 
All that you 
think can only be His Thoughts, sharing with Him the holy 
Thoughts of God. 
Earn now the gratitude you have denied yourself 
when you forgot the function God has given you. 
But never think 
that He has ever ceased to offer thanks to you. 
W(443) 


596 Acts 17:28 for in Him we live and move and have our being, as also some of your own poets have 
said, “For we are also His offspring.” 


1449 


11-445 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 198 "Only my condemnation injures me." 

W 198 L 1 . 
Injury is impossible. 
And yet illusion makes illusion. 
If 
you can condemn you can be injured. 
For you have believed that 
you can injure, and the right you have established for yourself can 
be now used against you, 'til you lay it down as valueless, un¬ 
wanted and unreal. 
Then does illusion cease to have effects, and 
all 597 it seemed to have will be undone. 
Then are you free, for free¬ 
dom is your gift, and you can now receive the gift you gave. 


W 198 L 2. 
Condemn and you are made a prisoner. 
Forgive and you 
are freed. 
Such is the law that rules perception. 
It is not a law that 
knowledge understands, for freedom is a part of knowledge. 
To 
condemn is thus impossible in truth. 
What seems to be its influence 
and its effects have not occurred at all. 
Yet must we deal with them 
a while as if they had. 
Illusion makes illusion. 
Except one. 
For¬ 
giveness is illusion that is answer to the rest. 


w 198 L 3. 
Forgiveness sweeps all other dreams away, and though it 
is itself a dream, it breeds no others. 
All illusions save this one must 
multiply a thousand fold. 
But this is where illusions end. 
Forgive¬ 
ness is the end of dreams because it is a dream of waking. 
It is not 
itself the truth. 
Yet does it point to where the truth must be, and 
gives direction with the certainty of God Fhmself. 
It is a dream in 
which the Son of God awakens to his Self and to his Father knowing 
They are One . 
598 

w 198 L 4. 
Forgiveness is the only road that leads out of disaster, past 
all suffering, and finally away from death. 
Flow could there be an¬ 
other way, when this one is the plan of God Fhmself? And why 
should 599 you oppose it, quarrel with it, seek to find a thousand 

ways in which it must be wrong; a thousand other possibilities? 
W(444) 


5,7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (those) in place of "all”. 


Matthew 6:12 “And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive those who trespass against us.” 

598 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


599 Handwritten mark-up suggests (would). 



11-446 


1450 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


W 198 L 5. 
Is it not wiser to be glad you hold the answer to your 
problems in your hand? Is it not more intelligent to thank the One 
Who gives salvation, and accept His gift with gratitude? And is it 
not a kindness to yourself to hear His Voice and learn the simple 
lessons He would teach, instead of trying to dismiss His Words and 
substitute your own in place of His? 

w 198 L 6. 
His Words 600 will work. 
His Words will save. 
His Words 
contain all hope, all blessing and all joy that ever can be found upon 
this earth. 
His Words are born in God, and come to you with 
Heaven's love upon them. 
Those who hear His Words have heard 
the song of Heaven, for these are the words in which all will merge 
as one at last. 
And as this one will fade away, the Word of God will 
come to take its place, for It will be remembered then and loved. 


W 198 L 7. 
This world has many seeming separate haunts where 
mercy has no meaning, and attack appears as justified. 
Yet all are 
one; a place where death is offered to God's Son and to his Father. 

You may think They have accepted, but if you will look again upon 
the place where you beheld Their blood you will perceive a miracle 
instead. 
How foolish to believe that They could die! How foolish to 
believe you can attack! How mad to think that you could be con¬ 
demned, and that the holy Son of God can die! 

w 198 L 8. 
The stillness of your Self remains unmoved, untouched by 
thoughts like these, and unaware of any condemnation which could 
need forgiveness. 
Dreams of any kind are strange and alien to the 
truth. 
Yet 601 what but Truth could have a Thought Which builds a 
bridge to truth which 602 brings illusions to the other side? W(445) 
w 198 L 9. 
Today we practice letting freedom come to make its home 
with you. 
The truth bestows these words upon your mind, that you 
may find the key to light and let the darkness end: 

"Only my condemnation injures me. 



< ’ 00 Handwritten mark-up suggests that “Words” be set in lower case as (words) in each instance in this 
paragraph, but we’re only footnoting it once. 


601 Handwritten mark-up suggests (And). 


602 Handwritten mark-up suggests (it that) in place of “truth which”. 



1451 


11-447 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Only my own forgiveness sets me free." 

Do not forget today that there can be no form of suffering that fails 
to hide an unforgiving thought. 
Nor can there be a form of pain 
forgiveness cannot heal. 


W 198 L 10. 
Accept the one illusion which proclaims there is no con¬ 
demnation in God's Son, and Heaven is remembered instantly; the 
world forgotten, all its weird beliefs forgotten with it, as the Face of 
Christ appears unveiled at last in this one dream. 
This is the gift the 
Holy Spirit holds for you from God your Father. 
Let today be cele¬ 
brated both on earth and in your holy home as well. 
Be kind to 
both, as you forgive the trespasses you thought them guilty of, and 
see your innocence shining upon you from the Face of Christ . 
603 
w 198 L 11 . 
Now is there silence all around the world. 
Now is there 
stillness where before there was a frantic rush of thoughts that made 
no sense. 
Now is there tranquil light across the face of earth, made 
quiet in a dreamless sleep. 
And now the Word of God alone re¬ 
mains upon it. 
Only That can be perceived an instant longer. 
Then 
are symbols done, and everything you ever thought you made com¬ 
pletely vanished from the mind which God forever knows to be His 
only Son. 


W 198 L 12. 
There is no condemnation in him. 
He is perfect in his ho¬ 
liness. 
He needs no thoughts of mercy. 
Who could give him gifts 
when everything is his? And who could dream of offering forgive¬ 
ness to the Son of Sinlessness Itself, so like to Him Whose Son he is, 
that to behold the Son is to perceive no more, and only know the 
Father? In this vision of the Son, so brief that not an instant stands 
between this single sight and timelessness itself, you see the vision 
of yourself and then you disappear forever into God. 
W(446) 

W 198 L 13. 
Today we come still nearer to the end of everything that 
yet would stand between this vision and our sight. 
And we are glad 
that we have come this far, and recognize that He Who brought us 


603 Mark 11:25 “And when you stand praying, if you have anything against anyone, forgive it so that 
also your Father in Heaven may forgive you your trespasses.” 


11-448 


1452 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


here will not forsake us now. 
For He would give to us the gift that 
God has given us through Him today. 
Now is it 604 time for 605 your 
deliverance. 
The time has come. 
The time has come today. 
W(447) 


604 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the) in place of “it”. 

603 Handwritten mark-up suggests (of) in place of “for”. 



1453 


11-449 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 199 "I am not a body. 
I am free." 

w 199 L1. 
Freedom must be impossible as long as you perceive a 
body as yourself. 
The body is a limit. 
Who would seek for freedom 
in a body looks for it where it can not be found. 
The mind can be 
made free when it no longer sees itself as in a body, firmly tied to it, 
and sheltered by its presence. 
If this were the truth, the mind were 
vulnerable indeed! 

W 199 L 2. 
The mind that serves the Holy Spirit is unlimited forever, 
in all ways, beyond the laws of time and space, unbound by any 
preconceptions, and with strength and power to do whatever it is 
asked. 
Attack thoughts cannot enter such a mind, because it has 
been given to the Source of Love, and 606 fear can never enter in a 
mind which has attached itself to Love. 
It rests in God, and who can 
be afraid who lives in Innocence and only loves? 

w 199 L 3. 
It is essential for your progress in this course that you ac¬ 
cept today's idea, and hold it very dear. 
Be not concerned that to the 
ego it is quite insane. 
The ego holds the body dear because it dwells 
in it, and lives united with the home that it has made. 
It is a part of 
the illusion which has sheltered it from being found illusory itself, 
w 199 L 4. 
Here does it hide, and here it can be seen as what it is. 
De¬ 
clare your innocence, and you are free. 
The body disappears be¬ 
cause you have no need of it except the need the Holy Spirit sees. 


For this, the body will appear as useful form for what the mind 
must do. 
It thus becomes a vehicle which helps forgiveness be ex¬ 
tended to the all-inclusive goal that it must reach, according to 
God's plan. 
W(448) 

W 199 L 5. 
Cherish today's idea, and practice it today and every day. 

Make it a part of every practice period you take. 
There is no 
thought that will not gain thereby in power to help the world, nor 
none which will not gain in added gifts to you as well. 
We sound 


606 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here, with handwriting suggesting a comma instead. 
We 
agree with the handwriting on this one. 



11-450 


1454 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


the call of freedom 'round the world with this idea. 
And would you 
be exempt from the acceptance of the gifts you give? 
w 199 L 6. 
The Holy Spirit is the home of minds that seek for free¬ 
dom. 
In Him they find 607 what they have sought. 
The body's pur¬ 
pose now is unambiguous. 
And it becomes perfect in the ability to 
serve an undivided goal. 
In conflict-free and unequivocal response 
to mind with but the thought of freedom as its goal, the body serves, 
and serves its purpose well. 
Without the power to enslave, it is a 
worthy servant of the freedom which the mind within the Holy 
Spirit seeks. 


w 199 L 7. 
Be free today, and carry freedom as your gift to those who 
still believe they are enslaved within a body. 
Be you free, so that the 
Holy Spirit can make use of your escape from bondage to set free 
the many who perceive themselves as bound and helpless and 
afraid. 
Let love replace their fears through you. 
Accept salvation 
now, and give your mind to Him Who calls to you to make this gift 
to Him. 
For He would give you perfect freedom, perfect joy, and 
hope that finds its full accomplishment in God. 

w 199 L 8. 
You are God's Son. 
In immortality you live forever. 


Would you not return your mind to this? Then practice well the 
thought the Holy Spirit gives you for today. 
Your brothers stand 
released with you in it; the world is blessed along with you, God's 
Son will weep no more, and Heaven offers thanks at 608 the increase 
of joy your practice brings even to it. 
And God Himself extends His 
Love and happiness each time you say: 

"I am not a body. 
I am free. 


I hear the Voice that God has given me, 

And it is only this my mind obeys.'' W(449) 


607 Handwritten mark-up suggests (have found). 


608 Handwritten mark-up suggests (for) in place of “at”. 



1455 


11-451 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 200 "There is no peace except the peace of God." 

w 200 L l. 
Seek you no further. 
You will not find peace except the 
peace of God . 
609 Accept this fact, and save yourself the agony of yet 
more bitter disappointments, bleak despair, and sense of icy hope¬ 
lessness and doubt. 
Seek you no further. 
There is nothing else for 
you to find except the peace of God, unless you seek for misery and 
pain. 


W 200 L 2. 
This is the final point to which each one must come at last, 
to lay aside all hope of finding happiness where there is none; of 
being saved by what can only hurt; of making peace of chaos, joy of 
pain and Heaven out of hell. 
Attempt no more to win through los¬ 
ing, nor to die to live. 
You cannot but be asking for defeat, 
w 200 L 3. 
Yet you can ask as easily for love, for happiness, and for 
eternal life in peace that has no ending. 
Ask for this, and you can 
only win. 
To ask for what you have already must succeed. 
To ask 
that what is false be true can only fail. 
Forgive yourself for vain 
imaginings , 610 and seek no longer what you cannot find. 
For what 
could be more foolish than to seek and seek and seek again for hell, 
when you have but to look with open eyes to find that Heaven lies 
before you, through a door which opens easily to welcome you? 
W200L4. 
Come home. 
You have not found your happiness in for¬ 
eign places, and in alien forms which have no meaning to you , 611 
though you sought to make them meaningful. 
This world is not 
where you belong . 
612 You are a stranger here . 
613 But it is given you 

609 Philippians 4:7 And the peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your hearts and 
minds through Christ Jesus. 


Collosians 3:15 And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which you also are called in one body, 
and be thankful. 


610 Acts 4:25 who by the mouth of Your servant David has said, “Why did the nations rage and the 
people imagine vain things? 

611 Exo 18:2-3 then Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her 
back, and her two sons, of which the name of the one was Gershom (for he said, I have been an alien in 
a strange land), 

612 John 18:36 Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. 
If My kingdom were of this world, 
then My servants would fight so that I might not be delivered to the Jews. 
But now My kingdom is not 
from here.” 

613 2 Samuel 15:19 Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, Why do you also go with us? Return to your 
place, and stay with the king. 
For you are a stranger, and also an exile. 



11-452 


1456 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


to find the means whereby the world no longer seems to be a prison 
house for you 614 or anyone. 
615 W(450) 

W 200 L 5. 
Freedom is given you where you beheld but chains and 
iron doors. 
For 616 you must change your mind about the purpose of 
the world, if you would find escape. 
You will be bound 'til all the 
world is seen by you as blessed, and everyone made free of your 
mistakes and honored as he is . 
617 You made him not; no more your¬ 
self. 
And as you free the one, the other is accepted as he is. 


W 200 L 6. 
What does forgiveness do? In truth it has no function and 
does nothing, for it is unknown in Fieaven. 
It is only hell where it is 
needed, and where it must serve a mighty function. 
Is not the es¬ 
cape of God's beloved Son from evil dreams which he imagines, yet 
believes are true, a worthy purpose? Who could hope for more 
while there appears to be a choice to make between success and 
failure; love and fear? 

w 200 L 7. 
There is no peace except the peace of God because Fie has 
one Son, who cannot make a world in opposition to God's Will and 
to his own, which is the same as His. 
What could he hope to find in 
such a world? It cannot have reality because it never was created. 


Is it here that he would seek for peace? Or must he see that, as he 
looks on it, the world can but deceive? Yet can he learn to look on it 
another way, and find the peace of God . 
618 

w 200 L 8. 
Peace is the bridge which everyone will cross to leave this 
world behind. 
But it 619 begins within the world perceived as differ¬ 
ent, and leading from this fresh perception to the gate of Fieaven 
and the way beyond . 
620 Peace is the answer to conflicting goals, to 


614 Handwritten mark-up suggests (your prison house, the jail for anyone). 


615 Acts 5:19 But the angel of the Lord opened the prison doors by night and brought them out, and 
said, 

616 Handwritten mark-up suggests (But). 


617 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 

618 Mark 1:15 and saying, “The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God draws near. 
Repent, and 
believe the gospel.” 

619 Handwritten mark-up suggests (peace). 


620 Genesis 28:17 And he was afraid and said, “How awesome is this place! This is none other than the 
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!” 


1457 


11-453 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


senseless journeys, frantic vain pursuits and meaningless endeavors. 

Now the way is easy, sloping gently toward the bridge where free¬ 
dom lies within the peace of God. 
W(45l) 

w 200 L 9. 
Let us not lose our way again today. 
We go to Heaven, 
and the path is straight. 
621 Only if you attempt to wander can there 
be delay, and needless wasted time on thorny byways. 
God alone is 
sure, and He will guide your footsteps. 
He will not desert His Son 
in need, nor let him stray forever from his home. 
The Father calls; 
the Son will hear. 
And that is all there is to what appears to be a 
world apart from God, where bodies have reality, 
w 200 L 10. 
Now is there silence. 
Seek no further. 
You have come to 
where the road is carpeted with leaves of false desires, fallen from 
the trees of hopelessness you sought before. 
Now are they under¬ 
foot. 
And you look up and on toward Heaven, with the body's eyes 
but serving for an instant longer now. 
Peace is already recognized 
at last, and you can feel its soft embrace surround your heart and 
mind with comfort and with love. 


w 200 L ll. 
Today we seek no idols. 
622 Peace can not be found in 
them. 
The peace of God is ours, and only this will we accept and 
want. 
Peace be to us today. 
For we have found a simple, happy 
way to leave the world of ambiguity, and to replace our shifting 
goals and solitary dreams with single purpose and companionship. 

For peace is union if it be of God. 
We seek no further. 
We are close 
to home, and draw still nearer every time we say: 

"There is no peace except the peace of God, 

And I am glad and thankful it is so." W(452) 


621 Isaiah 40:3 The voice of one crying in the wilderness: “Prepare the way of the LORD; Make straight 
in the desert A highway for our God.” 

John 1:23 He said: “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness: 

Make straight the way of the LORD,” 
as the prophet Isaiah said. 


622 Isaiah 19:3 And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst of it, and I will destroy its wisdom. 
And 
they shall seek to idols, and to the enchanters, and to the mediums, and to the future-tellers. 


Hosea 4:12 My people seek advice from their wooden idols , and their rod declares to them. 
For the 
spirit of harlotry has caused them to go astray, and they have gone lusting away from under their God. 



11-454 


1458 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Review 6 (W 200 R6) 


Introduction 


September 1, 1970 


w 200 R61 . 
For this review, we take but one idea each day, and prac¬ 
tice it as often as is possible. 
Besides the time you give morning and 
evening, which should not be less than fifteen minutes, and the 
hourly remembrances you make throughout the day, use the idea as 
often as you can between them. 
Each of these ideas alone would be 
sufficient for salvation, if it were learned truly. 
Each would be 
enough to give release to you and to the world from every form of 
bondage, and invite the memory of God to come again. 


W 200 R6 2. 
With this in mind, we start our practicing in which we 
carefully review the thoughts the Holy Spirit has bestowed on us in 
our last twenty lessons. 
Each contains the whole curriculum, if un¬ 
derstood, practiced, accepted and applied to all the seeming hap¬ 
penings throughout the day. 
One is enough. 
But for 623 that one, 
there must be no exceptions made. 
And so we need to use them all, 
and let them blend as one as each contributes to the whole we learn. 


w 200 R6 3. 
These practice sessions, like our last review, are centered 
round a central theme with which we start and end each lesson. 
It is 
this: 

"I am not a body. 
I am free. 


For I am still as God created me." 

The day begins and ends with this. 
And we repeat it every time the 
hour strikes, or we remember, in between, we have a function that 
transcends the world we see. 
Beyond this, and a repetition of the 
special thought we practice for the day, no form of exercise is urged, 
except a deep relinquishment of everything that clutters up the 
mind, and makes it deaf to reason, sanity and simple truth. 


w 200 R6 4. 
We will attempt to get beyond all words and special 
forms of practicing for this review. 
For we attempt this time to 


'' 1 Handwritten mark-up suggests (from). 



1459 


11-455 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


reach a quickened pace along a shorter path to the serenity and 
peace of God. 
We merely close our eyes, and then forget all that we 
thought we knew and understood. 
For thus is freedom given us 
from all we did not know and failed to understand. 
W(453) 

w 200 R6 5. 
There is but one exception to this lack of structuring. 

Permit no idle thought to go unchallenged. 
If you notice it, 624 deny 
its hold and hasten to assure your mind that this is not what it 
would have. 
Then gently let the thought which you denied be given 
up in sure and quick exchange for the idea you 625 practice for the 
day. 


w 200 R6 6. 
When you are tempted, hasten to proclaim your freedom 
from temptation, as you say: 

"This thought I do not want. 
I choose instead ..." 

And then repeat the idea for the day, and let it take the place of 
what you thought. 
Beyond such special applications of each day's 
idea, we will add but 626 few formal expressions or specific thoughts 
to aid your 627 practicing. 
Instead we give these times of quiet to the 
Teacher Who instructs in quiet, speaks of peace, and gives our 
thoughts whatever meaning they may have. 


w 200 R6 7. 
To Him I offer this review for you. 
I place you in His 
charge, and let Him teach you what to do and say and think each 
time you turn to Him. 
He will not fail to be available to you each 
time you call to Him to help you. 
Let us offer Him the whole review 
we now begin, and let us also not forget to Whom it has been given, 
as we practice, day by day, advancing toward the goal He set for us; 
allowing Him to teach us how to go, and trusting Him completely 
for the way each practice period can best become a loving gift of 
freedom to the world. 
W(454) 


624 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


623 Handwritten mark-up suggests (we). 


626 Handwritten mark-up suggests (a). 


ft " 7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (in) in place of “your”. 



11-456 


1460 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 201 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

W 201 L l. 
181) "I trust my brothers, who are one with me." 

No-one but is my brother. 
I am blessed 
with oneness with the universe and God, 
my Father, One 628 Creator of the Whole 
that is my Self, forever One 629 with me. 
630 


f,2s Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


629 Handwritten mark-up suggests (one). 


630 I landwritten mark-up suggests (Repeat theme.) 


1461 


11-457 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 1 


Lesson 202 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

W 202 L 1. 
182) "I will be still a moment and go home." 

Why would I choose to stay an instant more 
where I do not belong, when God Himself 
has given me His Voice to call me home? 


11-458 


1462 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 203 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 203 L l. 
183) "I call upon God's Name and on my own." 

The Name of God is my deliverance 
from every thought of evil and of sin, 
because it is my own as well as His. 



1463 


11-459 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 204 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 204 L1. 
184) "The Name of God is my inheritance." 

God's Name reminds me that I am His Son, 
not slave to time, unbound by laws which rule 
the world of sick illusions, free in God, 
forever and forever one with Him. 
W(455) 


11-460 


1464 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 205 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 205 L l. 
185) "I want the peace of God." 

The peace of God is everything I want. 


The peace of God is my one goal; the aim 
of all my living here, the end I seek, 
my purpose and my function and my life 
while I abide where I am not at home. 



1465 


11-461 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 206 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 206 L1 . 
186) "Salvation of the world depends on me." 

I am entrusted with the gifts of God, 
because I am His Son. 
And I would give 
His gifts where He intended them to be. 



11-462 


1466 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 207 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 207 L l. 
187) "I bless the world because I bless myself." 

God's blessing shines upon me from within 
my heart, where He abides. 
I need but turn 
to Him, and every sorrow melts away 
as I accept His boundless love for me. 



1467 


11-463 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 208 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 208 L1 . 
188) "The peace of God is shining in me now." 

I will be still, and let the earth be still 
along with me. 
And in that stillness, we 
will find the peace of God. 
It is within 
my heart, which witnesses to God Himself. 
W(456) 


11-464 


1468 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 209 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 209 L l. 
189) "I feel the Love of God within me now." 

The Love of God is what created me. 


The Love of God is everything I am. 


The Love of God proclaimed me as His Son. 


The Love of God within me sets me free. 



1469 


11-465 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 210 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 210 L1. 
190) "I choose the joy of God instead of pain." 

Pain is my own idea. 
It is not 
a thought of God, but one I thought apart 
from Him and from His Will. 
His Will is joy 
and only joy for His beloved Son. 


And that I choose instead of what I made. 



11-466 


1470 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 211 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 211 L l. 
191) "I am the holy Son of God Himself." 

In silence and in true humility 
I seek God's glory, to behold it in 
the Son whom He created as my Self. 



1471 

PROOF COPY 


11-467 


Part 1 


Lesson 212 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 212 L1. 
192) "I have a function God would have me fill." 

I seek the function that would set me free 
from all the vain illusions of the world. 


Only the function God has given me 
can offer freedom. 
Only this I seek, 
and only this will I accept as mine. 
W(457) 


11-468 


1472 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 213 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 213 L l. 
193) "All things are lessons God would have me learn." 

A lesson is a miracle which God 
offers to me, in place of thoughts I made 
that hurt me. 
What I learn of Him becomes 
the way I am set free. 
And so I choose 
to learn His lessons, and forget my own. 



1473 


11-469 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 214 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 214 L1. 
194) "I place the future in the hands of God." 

The past is gone; the future is not yet. 


Now am I freed from both. 
For what God gives 

can only be for good. 
And I accept 

but what He gives as what belongs to me. 



11-470 


1474 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 215 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 215 l. 
195) "Love is the way I walk in gratitude." 

The Holy Spirit is my only Guide. 


He walks with me in love. 
And I give thanks 
to Him for showing me the way to go. 



1475 


11-471 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 216 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 216 L 1 . 
196) "It can be but myself I crucify." 

All that I do I do unto myself. 


If I attack, I suffer. 
But if I 

forgive, salvation will be given me. 
W(458) 


11-472 


PROOF 


1476 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 217 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 217 L l. 
197) "It can be but my gratitude I earn." 

Who should give thanks for my salvation but 
myself? And how but through salvation can 
I find the Self to Whom my thanks are due? 


1477 


11-473 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 218 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

W 218 L 1. 
198) "Only my condemnation injures me." 

My condemnation keeps my vision dark, 
and through my sightless eyes I cannot see 
the vision of my glory. 
Yet today 
I can behold this glory, and be glad. 



11-474 


1478 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 219 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

W 219 L l. 
199) "I am not a body. 
I am free." 

I am God's Son. 
Be still, my mind, and think 
a moment upon this. 
And then return 
to earth without confusion as to what 
my Father loves forever as His Son. 



1479 


11-475 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 1 


Lesson 220 "I am not a body. 
I am free. 
For I am still as God 
created me." 

w 220 L 1. 
200) "There is no peace except the peace of God." 

Let me not wander from the way of peace, 
for I am lost on other roads than this. 


But let me follow Him Who leads me home, 
and peace is certain as the Love of God. 
W(459) 


11-476 


1480 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Introduction to Part 2 (W 220 In2) 

W 220 In2 1. 
Words will mean little now. 
We use them but as 
guides on which we do not now depend. 
For now we seek direct 
experience of truth alone. 
The lessons which remain are merely in¬ 
troductions to the times in which we leave the world of pain, and go 
to enter into peace. 
Now we begin to reach the goal this course has 
set, and find the end toward which our practicing is geared.® 1 

w 220 In2 2. 
Now we attempt to let the exercise be merely a begin¬ 
ning. 
For we wait in quiet expectation for our God and Father. 
Fie 
has promised Fie will take the final step FFimself. 
And we are sure 
FFis promises are kept. 
We have come far along the road, and now 
we wait for FFim. 


W 220 In2 3. 
We will continue spending time with FFim each morning 
and at night, as long as makes us happy. 
We will not consider time 
a matter of duration now. 
We use as much as we will need for the 
result that we desire. 
Nor will we forget our hourly remembrance, 
in between calling to God when we have need of FFim as we are 
tempted to forget our goal. 


W 220 In2 4. 
We will continue with a central thought for all the days 
to come. 
And we will use that thought to introduce our times of 
rest, and calm our minds at need. 
Yet we will not content ourselves 
with simple practicing in the remaining holy instants which con¬ 
clude the year that we have given God. 
We say some simple words 
of welcome, and expect our Father to reveal FFimself as FFe has 
promised. 
We have called on FFim, and FFe has promised that FFis 
Son will not remain unanswered when he calls FFis Name. 
W(460) 

W 220 In2 5. 
Now do we come to FFim with but FFis Word upon our 
minds and hearts, 632 and wait for FFim to take the step to us that FFe 
has told us, through FFis Voice, FFe would not fail to take when we 
invited FFim. 
FFe has not left FFis Son in all his madness, nor be- 

, ” 1 The Urtext manuscript just says “(PART II)”. 
We added the words "Introduction to” and lowered 
the case. 


632 The Urtext manuscript, curiously, puts a sentence break in this spot, but the handwritten markup 
corrects it as shown here. 



1481 


11-477 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


trayed His trust in him. 
Has not His faithfulness earned Him the 
invitation that He seeks to make us happy? We will offer it, and it 
will be accepted. 
So our times with Him will now be spent. 
We say 
the words of invitation that His Voice suggests, 633 then we wait for 
Him to come to us. 


w 220 In2 6. 
Now is the time of prophecy fulfilled. 
Now are all an¬ 
cient promises upheld and fully kept. 
No step remains for time to 
separate from its accomplishment. 
For now we cannot fail. 
Sit si¬ 
lently and wait upon your Father. 
He has willed to come to you 
when you have recognized it is your will He do so. 
And you could 
have never come this far unless you saw, however dimly, that it is 
your will. 


w 220 In2 7. 
I am so close to you, we 634 cannot fail. 
Father, we give 
these holy times to You in gratitude to Him Who taught us how to 
leave the world of sorrow, in exchange for its replacement given us 
by You. 
We look not backward now. 
We look ahead, and fix our 
eyes upon the journey's end. 
Accept these little gifts of thanks from 
us, as through Christ's vision we behold a world beyond the one we 
made, and take that world to be the full replacement of our own. 


W 220 In2 8. 
And now we wait in silence, unafraid, and certain of 
Your coming. 
We have sought to find our way by following the 
Guide You sent to us. 
We did not know the way, but You did not 
forget us. 
And we know that You will not forget us now. 
We ask 
but that Your ancient promises be kept which are Your Will to keep. 

We will with You in asking this. 
The Father and the Son, Whose 
holy Will created all that is, can fail in nothing. 
In this certainty, we 
undertake these last few steps to You, and rest in confidence upon 
Your Love, Which will not fail the Son who calls to You. 
W(46l) 

w 220 In2 9. 
And so we start upon the final part of this one holy year, 
which we have spent together in the search for Truth and God, Who 


633 Handwritten mark-up suggests (and). 


634 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you). 



11-478 


1482 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


is Its one Creator. 
635 We have found the way He chose for us, and 
made the choice to follow it as He would have us go. 
636 His hand 
has held us up. 
His Thoughts have lit the darkness of our minds. 


His Love has called to us unceasingly since time began. 


w 220 In2 to. 
We had a wish that God would fail to have the Son 
whom He created of Himself. 
We wanted God to change Himself, 
and be what we would make of Him. 
And we believed that our in¬ 
sane desires were the truth. 
Now we are glad that this is all undone, 
and we no longer think illusions true. 
The memory of God is shim¬ 
mering across the wide horizons of our minds. 
A moment more, 
and It will rise again. 
A moment more, and we who are God's Son 
are safely home, where He would have us be. 

w 220 In2 11. 
Now is the need for practice almost done. 
For in this 
final section we will come to understand that we need only call to 
God, and all temptations disappear. 
Instead of words, we need but 
feel His Love. 
Instead of prayer, 637 we need but call His Name. 
In¬ 
stead of judging, we need but be still and let all things be healed. 


We will accept the way God's plan will end, as we received the way 
it started. 
Now is it complete. 
This year has brought us to eternity, 
w 220 In2 12. 
One further use for words we still retain. 
From time to 
time, instructions on a theme of special relevance will intersperse 
our daily lessons and the periods of wordless, deep experience 
which should come afterwards. 
These special thoughts should be 
reviewed each day, each one of them to be continued Til the next is 
given you. 
They should be slowly read and thought about a little 


635 Isaiah 40:28 Have you not known? Have you not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the 
Creator of the ends of the earth, does not grow weak nor weary? There is no searching of His under¬ 
standing. 


636 Isaiah 40:3 The voice of him who cries in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make 
straight a highway in the desert for our God. 


Isaiah 62:10 Pass! Pass through the gates; prepare the way of the people. 
Raise up! Raise up the high¬ 
way; gather out the stones; lift up a banner for the peoples. 
Matthew 7:13-14 “Go in through the nar¬ 
row gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there are who go 
in through it. 
Because narrow is the gate and constricted is the way which leads to life, and there are 
few who find it.” 

Mark 1:3 The voice of one crying in the wilderness, “prepare the way of the Lord, make His paths 
straight.” 

637 Handwritten mark-up suggests pluralizing “prayer” to become (prayers). 



1483 


11-479 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


while, preceding one of the holy and blessed instants in the day. 
We 
give the first of these instructions now. 
W(462) 


11-480 


PROOF 


1484 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


(1) What is forgiveness? (W 220 Wl) 

W 220 Wl 1 . 
Forgiveness recognizes what you thought your brother 
did to you has not occurred. 
It does not pardon sins and make them 
real. 
It sees there was no sin. 
And in this view are all your sins for¬ 
given. 
What is sin except a false idea about God's Son? Forgiveness 
merely sees its falsity, and therefore lets it go. 
What then is free to 
take its place is now the Will of God. 


W 220 Wl 2. 
An unforgiving thought is one which makes a judgment 
that it will not raise to doubt, although it is untrue. 
The mind is 
closed, and will not be released. 
The thought protects projection, 
tightening its chains, so that distortions are more veiled and more 
obscure; less easily accessible to doubt, and further kept from rea¬ 
son. 
What can come between a fixed projection and the aim that it 
has chosen as its needed 638 goal? 

W 220 Wl 3. 
An unforgiving thought does many things. 
In frantic 
action it pursues its goal, twisting and overturning what it sees as 
interfering with its chosen path. 
Distortion is its purpose and the 
means by which it would accomplish it as well. 
It sets about its fu¬ 
rious attempts to smash reality without concern for anything that 
would appear to pose a contradiction to its point of view. 


W 220 Wl 4. 
Forgiveness, on the other hand, is still, and quietly does 
nothing. 
It offends no aspect of reality, nor seeks to twist it to ap¬ 
pearance 639 that it likes. 
It merely looks and waits and judges not. 


Fie who would not forgive must judge, for he must justify his failure 
to forgive. 
But he who would forgive himself must learn to wel¬ 
come truth exactly as it is. 


W 220 Wl 5. 
Do nothing, then, and let forgiveness show you what to 
do through Him Who is your Guide, your Savior and Defender, 640 
strong in hope and certain of your ultimate success. 
Fie has forgiven 
you already, for such is Fiis function, given Flim by God. 
Now must 


f ” s Handwritten mark-up suggests (wanted). 


639 Handwritten mark-up suggests (appearances it likes.) 

640 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Protector) in place of “Defender”. 



1485 


11-481 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


you share His function, and forgive whom He has saved, whose 
sinlessness He sees, and whom He honors as the Son of God. 
W(463) 


11-482 


PROOF 


1486 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 221 "Peace to my mind. 
Let all my thoughts be still." 

w 221 L l. 
"Father, I come to You today to seek the peace that You 
alone can give. 
I come in silence. 
In the quiet of my heart, the deep 
recesses of my mind, I wait and listen for Your Voice. 
My Father, 
speak to me today. 
I come to hear Your Voice in silence and in cer¬ 
tainty and love, sure You will hear my call and answer me." 641 

w 221L 2. 
Now do we wait in quiet. 
God is here because we wait 
together. 
I am sure that He will speak to you, and you will hear. 

Accept my confidence, for it is yours. 
Our minds are joined. 
We 
wait with one intent; to hear our Father's answer to our call, to let 
our thoughts be still and find His peace, to hear Him speak to us of 
what we are, and to reveal Himself unto His Son. 
W(464) 


641 John 11:41 Then they took away the stone where the dead was laid. 
And Jesus lifted up His eyes 
and said, Father, I thank You that You have heard Me. 



1487 


11-483 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 222 "God is with me. 
I live and breathe in Him." 

w 222 L1. 
God is with me. 
He is my Source of life, the life within, 
the air I breathe, the food by which I am sustained, the water which 
renews and cleanses me. 
He is my home, wherein I live and move; 
the Spirit Which directs my actions, offers me Its Thoughts, and 
guarantees my safety from all pain. 
He covers me with kindness 
and with care, and holds in love the Son He shines upon, who also 
shines on Him. 
How still is he who knows the truth of what He 
speaks today! 

w 222 L 2 . 
" Father, we have no words except Your Name upon our lips and 
in our minds, as we come quietly into Your Presence now, and ask to 
rest with You in peace a while." W(465) 


11-484 


1488 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 223 "God is my life. 
I have no life but His." 

w 223 L l. 
I was mistaken when I thought I lived apart from God, a 
separate entity which moved in isolation, unattached, and housed 
within a body. 
Now I know my life is God's, I have no other home, 
and I do not exist apart from Him. 
He has no Thoughts that are not 
part of me, and I have none but Those which are of Him. 


w 223 L 2 . 
"Our Father, let us see the face of Christ instead of our mis¬ 
takes. 
For we who are Your holy Son, 642 are sinless. 
We would look 
upon our sinlessness, for guilt proclaims that we are not Your Son. 

And we ivould not forget You longer. 
We are lonely here, and long for 
Heaven where we are at home. 
Today we woidd return. 
Our name is 
Yours, and we acknowledge that we are Your Son." W(466) 


l ! The original Urtext manuscript has “Son” in the singular, while the handwritten editing adds the “s” 
in each instance in this paragraph. 
The plural form is grammatically more appropriate. 
However the 
Notes and FIP both have the singular form. 


Throughout the Course the plural and singular forms of words for relatives are both used 
with great frequency, e.g. 
child and children, son and sons, brother and brothers. 
There seems little 
significance to the choice of singular or plural since “God has only ONE Son” (T 2 E 16 (43)) The 
entire paragraph from Chapter II is probably worth quoting in the context of the singular/plural consid¬ 
eration: “If all the Souls God created ARE His Sons, then every Soul MUST be an integral part of the 
whole Sonship. 
You do not find the concept that the whole is greater than its parts difficult to under¬ 
stand. 
You should, therefore, not have too much trouble in understanding this. 
The Sonship in its One¬ 
ness DOES transcend the sum of its parts. 
However, this is obscured as long as any of its parts are miss¬ 
ing. 
That is why the conflict cannot ultimately be resolved until ALL the parts of the Sonship have 
returned. 
Only then can the meaning of wholeness, in the true sense, be fully understood.” 


1489 


11-485 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 224 "God is my Father, and He loves His Son." 

w 224 L l. 
My true identity is so secure, so lofty, sinless, glorious and 
great, wholly beneficent and free from guilt, that Heaven looks to It 
to give it light. 
It lights the world as well. 
It is the gift my Father 
gave me, and the one as well I give the world. 
There is no gift but 
This that can be either given or received. 
This is reality, and only 
This. 
This is illusion's end. 
It is the Truth. 


w 224 L 2 . 
"My Name, oh Father, still is known to Yon. 
I have forgot¬ 
ten it, and do not know where I am going, who I am, or what it is I do. 

Remind me, Father, now, for I am weary of the world I see. 
Reveal 
what You would have me see instead." W(467) 


11-486 


1490 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 225 "God is my Father, and His Son loves Him." 

W225L1. 
"Father, I must return Your Love for me. 
For giving and 
receiving are the same, and You have given all Your Love to me. 
I 
must return It, for I want It mine in full awareness, blazing in my 
mind, and keeping it within Its kindly light, inviolate, beloved, with 
fear behind and only peace ahead. 
How still the way Your loving 
Son is led along to You!" 

W 225 L 2. 
Brother, we find that stillness now. 
The way is open. 


Now we follow it in peace together. 
You have reached your hand to 
me, and I will never leave you. 
We are one, and it is but this one¬ 
ness that we seek as we accomplish these few final steps which end 
a journey that was not begun. 
W(468) 


1491 


11-487 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 226 "My home awaits me. 
I will hasten there." 

W 226 LI. 
If I so choose, I can depart this world entirely. 
It is not 
death which makes this possible, but it is change of mind about the 
purpose of the world. 
If I believe it has a value as I see it now, so 
will it still remain for me. 
But if I see no value in the world as I be¬ 
hold it, nothing that I want to keep as mine or search for as a goal, it 
will depart from me. 
For I have not sought for illusions to replace 
the truth. 


w 226 L 2 . 
" Father, my home awaits my glad return. 
Your arms are 
open, and I hear Your Voice. 
What need have I to linger in a place of 
vain desires and of broken dreams, when Heaven can so easily be 
mine?" W(469) 


11-488 


1492 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 227 "This is my holy instant of release." 

W 227 L 1. 
"Father, it is today that I am free, because my will is 
Yours. 
I thought to make another will. 
Yet nothing that I thought 
apart from You exists. 
And I am free because I was mistaken, and 
did not affect my own reality at all by my illusions. 
Now I give 
them up, and lay them down before the feet of truth, to be removed 
forever from my mind. 
This is my holy instant of release. 
Father, I 
know my will is one with Yours." 

W 227 L 2. 
And so today we find our glad return to Fieaven, which 
we never really left. 
The Son of God this day lays down his dreams 
The Son of God this day comes home again, released from sin and 
clad in holiness, with his right mind restored to him at last. 
W(470) 


1493 


11-489 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 228 "God has condemned me not. 
No more do I." 

w 228 L l. 
My Father knows my holiness. 
Shall I deny His knowl¬ 
edge, and believe in what His knowledge makes impossible? Shall I 
accept as true what He proclaims as false? Or shall I take His Word 
for what I am since He is my Creator, and the One Who knows the 
true condition of His Son? 

w 228 L 2. 
" Father , I was mistaken in myself, because I failed to realize 
the Source from which I came. 
I have not left that Source to enter in a 
body and to die. 
My holiness remains a part of me, as I am part of You. 

And my mistakes about myself are dreams. 
I let them go today. 
And I 
stand ready to receive Your Word alone for what I really am." W(47i) 


11-490 


1494 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 229 "Love, Which created me, is what I am." 

W 229 L 1. 
I seek my own identity, and find it in these words: "Love, 
Which created me, is what I am." Now need I seek no more. 
Love 
has prevailed. 
So still it waited for my coming home, that I will turn 
away no longer from the holy face of Christ. 
And what I look upon 
attests the truth of the identity I sought to lose, but which my Father 
has kept safe for me. 


w 229 L 2. 
" Father , my thanks to You for what I am; for keeping my 
identity untouched and sinless in the midst of all the thoughts of sin 
my foolish mind made up. 
And thanks to You for saving me from 
them. 
Amen." W(472) 


1495 


11-491 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 230 "Now will I seek and find the peace of God." 

w 230 L l. 
In peace I was created. 
And in peace do I remain. 
It is not 
given me to change my Self. 
How merciful is God my Father, that 
when He created me He gave me peace forever. 
Now I ask but to be 
what I am. 
And can this be denied me when it is forever so 643 ? 

w 230 L 2. 
" Father, I seek the peace you gave as mine in my creation. 
644 
What was given then must be here now, for my creation was apart 
from time and still remains beyond all change. 
The peace in which 
Your Son was born into Your Mind is shining there unchanged. 
I am 
as You created me. 
I need but call on You to find the peace You gave. 


It is Your Will that gave it to Your Son." W(473) 


643 Handwritten mark-up suggests (true). 


644 Genesis 1:27 So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and 
female created he them. 



11-492 


1496 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


(2) What is salvation? (W230 W2) 

w 230 W2 l. 
Salvation is a promise, made by God, that you would 
find your way to Him at last. 
It cannot not 645 be kept. 
It guarantees 
that time will have an end, and all the thoughts that 646 have been 
born in time will end as well. 
God's Word is given every mind 
which thinks that it has separate thoughts, and will replace these 
thoughts of conflict with the Thought of peace, 
w 230 W2 2. 
The Thought of peace was given to God's Son the instant 
that his mind had thought of war. 
There was no need for such a 
Thought before, for peace was given without opposite, and merely 
was. 
But when the mind is split, there is a need of healing. 
So the 
Thought Which 647 has the power to heal the split became a part of 
every fragment of the mind which still was one, but failed to recog¬ 
nize its oneness. 
Now it did not know itself, and thought its own 
identity was lost. 


W 230 W2 3. 
Salvation is undoing in the sense that it does nothing, 
failing to support the world of dreams and malice. 
Thus it lets illu¬ 
sions go. 
By not supporting them, it merely lets them quietly go 
down to dust. 
And what they hid is now revealed; an altar to the 
holy Name of God whereon His Word is written, with the gifts of 
your forgiveness laid before It, and the memory of God not far be¬ 
hind. 


W 230 W2 4. 
Let us come daily to this holy place, and spend a while 
together. 
Here we share our final dream. 
It is a dream in which 
there is no sorrow, for it holds a hint of all the glory given us by 
God. 
The grass is pushing through the soil, the trees are budding 
now, and birds have come to live within their branches. 
Earth is be¬ 
ing born again in new perception. 
Night has gone, and we have 
come together in the light. 



645 Handwritten mark-up suggests (but) in place of “and”. 


646 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 


447 Handwritten mark-up suggests (That). 



1497 


11-493 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


W 230 W2 5. 
From here we give salvation to the world, for it is here 
salvation was received. 
The song of our rejoicing is the call to all the 
world that freedom is returned, that time is almost over, and God's 
Son has but an instant more to wait until his Father is remembered, 
dreams are done, eternity has shined away the world, and only 
Fieaven now exists at all. 
W(474) 


11-494 


1498 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 231 "Father, I will but to remember You." 

W231L1. 
"What can I seek for, Father, but Your Love? Perhaps I 
think I seek for something else; a something I have called by many 
names. 
Yet is Your Love the only thing I seek, or ever sought. 
For 
there is nothing else that I coidd ever really want to find. 
Let me re¬ 
member You. 
What else coidd I desire but the truth about myself?" 

W 231 L 2. 
This is your will, my brother. 
And you share this will 
with me, and with the One as well Who is our Father. 
To remember 
Him is Heaven. 
This we seek. 
And only this is what it will be given 
us to find. 
W(475) 


1499 


11-495 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 232 "Be in my mind, my Father, through the day." 

w 232 L l. 
"Be in my mind, my Father, when I wake, and shine on me 
throughout the day today. 
Let every minute be a time in which I dwell 
with You. 
And let me not forget my hourly thanksgiving that You 
have remained with me, and always will be there to hear my call to You 
and answer me. 
As evening comes, let all my thoughts be still of You 
and of Your Love, and let me sleep sure of my safety, certain of Your 
care, and happily aware I am Your Son." 
w 232 L 2. 
This is as every day should be. 
Today practice the end of 
fear. 
Have faith in Him Who is your Father. 
Trust all things to Him. 

Let Him reveal all things to you, and be you undismayed because 
you are His Son. 
W(476) 


11-496 


PROOF 


1500 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 233 "I give my life to God to run 648 today." 

w 233 L l. 
" Father, I give You all my thoughts today. 
I umdd have 
none of mine. 
In place of them give me Your own. 
I give You all my 
acts as well, that I may do Your Will instead of seeking goals which 
cannot be obtained, and wasting time in vain imaginings. 
Today I 
come to You. 
I will step back and merely follow You. 
Be You the 
Guide, and I the follower who questions not the wisdom of the Infinite, 
nor Love Whose tenderness I cannot comprehend, but which is yet 
Your perfect gift to me." 

w 233 L 2. 
Today we have one Guide to lead us on. 
And as we walk 

together, we will give this day to Him with no reserve at all. 
This is 

His day. 
And so it is a day of countless gifts and mercies unto us. 


W(477) 


1 '' Handwritten mark-up suggests (guide). 



1501 


11-497 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 234 "Father, today I am Your Son again." 

W 234 L 1 . 
Today we will anticipate the time when dreams of sin and 
guilt are gone, and we have reached again 649 the holy place we never 
left. 
Merely a tiny instant has elapsed between eternity and time¬ 
lessness. 
So brief the interval there was no lapse in continuity, nor 
break in thoughts which are forever unified as one. 
Nothing has 
ever happened to disturb the peace of God the Father and the Son. 

This we accept as wholly true today. 


w 234 L 2. 
"We thank you, Father, that we cannot lose the memory of 
You and of Your Love. 
We recognize our safety, and give thanks for all 
the gifts You have bestowed on us, for all the loving help we have re¬ 
ceived, for Your eternal patience, and the Word Which You have given 
us that we are saved." W(478) 


11 The word “again” is crossed out in the Urtext manuscript. 



11-498 


1502 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 235 "God in His mercy wills that I be saved." 

w 235 L l. 
I need but look upon all things that seem to hurt me, and 
with perfect certainty assure myself, "God wills that I be saved from 
this," and merely watch them disappear. 
I need but keep in mind 
my Father's Will for me is only happiness, to find that only happi¬ 
ness has come to me. 
And I need but remember that His 650 Love sur¬ 
rounds His Son and keeps his sinlessness forever perfect, to be sure 
that I am saved and safe forever in His arms. 
I am the Son He loves. 

And I am saved because God in His mercy wills it so. 


w 235 L 2 . 
" Father, Your holiness is mine. 
Your Love created me, and 
made my sinlessness forever part of You. 
I have no guilt nor sin in me, 
for there is none in You." W(479) 


650 Handwritten mark-up suggests (God's). 


1503 

PROOF COPY 


11-499 



Part 2 


Lesson 236 "I rule my mind, which I alone must rule." 

w 236 L l. 
I have a kingdom I must rule. 
At times, it does not seem I 
am its king at all. 
It seems to triumph over me, and tell me what to 
think, and what to do and feel. 
And yet it has been given me to 
serve whatever purpose I perceive in it. 
My mind can only serve. 

Today I give its service to the Holy Spirit, to employ as He sees fit. 
I 
thus direct my mind, which I alone can rule. 
And thus I set it free, 
to do the Will of God. 


w 236 L 2. 
" Father , my mind is open to Your Thoughts, and closed to¬ 
day to every thought but Yours. 
I rule my mind, and offer it to You. 

Accept my gift, for it is Yours to me." W(480) 


11-500 


1504 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 237 "Now would I be as God created me." 

w 237 L l. 
Today I will accept the truth about myself. 
I will arise in 
glory, and allow the light in me to shine upon the world throughout 
the day. 
651 I bring the world the tidings of salvation that 652 1 hear as 
God my Father speaks to me. 
And I behold the world that Christ 
would have me see, aware it ends the bitter dream of death; aware it 
is my Father's call to me. 


w 237 L 2. 
"Christ is my eyes today, and His the ears which listen to 
the Voice of God today. 
Father, I come to Yon through Him Who is 
Your Son and my true Self as well. 
Amen." W(48i) 


651 Isaiah 60:1 Arise, shine; 

For your light has come! 

And the glory of the LORD is risen upon you. 


652 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 



1505 


11-501 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 238 "On my decision all salvation rests." 

w 238 L l. 
" Father, Your trust in me has been so great I must be wor¬ 
thy. 
You created me, and know me as I am. 
And yet You placed Your 
Son's salvation in my hands, and let it rest on my decision. 
I must be 
beloved of You indeed. 
And I must be steadfast in holiness as well, that 
You umdd give Your Son to me in certainty that He is safe Who still is 
part of You, and yet is mine because He is my Self." 

W 238 L 2. 
And so again today we pause to think how much our Fa¬ 
ther loves us. 
And how dear His Son, created by His Love, remains 
to Him Whose Love is made complete in him. 
W(482) 


11-502 


1506 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 239 "The glory of my Father is my own." 

w 239 L l. 
Let not the truth about ourselves today be hidden by a 
false humility. 
Let us instead be thankful for the gifts our Father 
gave us. 
Can we see in those with whom He shares His glory any 
trace of sin and guilt? And can it be that we are not among them, 
when He loves His Son forever and with perfect constancy, know¬ 
ing he is as He created him? 

w 239 L 2. 
"We thank yon, Father, for the light that shines forever in 
ns. 
And we honor it, because You share it with us. 
We are one, united 
in this light and one with You, at peace with all creation and our¬ 
selves. 
" W(483) 


1507 


11-503 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 240 "Fear is not justified in any form." 

w 240 L l. 
Fear is deception. 
It attests that you have seen yourself as 
you could never be, and therefore look upon a world which is im¬ 
possible. 
Not one thing in this world is true. 
It does not matter 
what the form in which it may appear. 
It witnesses but to your own 
illusions of yourself. 
Let us not be deceived today. 
We are the Son 
of God. 
There is no fear in us, for we are each a part of Love Itself, 
w 240 L 2 . 
"How foolish are our fears! Would You allow Your Son to 
suffer? Give us faith today to recognize Your Son and set him free. 


Let us forgive him in Your Name, that we may understand his holi¬ 
ness, and feel the love for him that 653 is Your own as well." W(484) 


653 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 



11-504 


1508 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


(3) What is the world? (W 240 W3) 

W 240 W3 1 . 
The world is false perception. 
It is born of error, and it 
has not left its source. 
It will remain no longer than the thought 
which gave it birth is cherished. 
When the thought of separation 
has been changed to one of true forgiveness, will the world be seen 
in quite another light; and one which leads to truth, where all the 
world must disappear, and all its errors vanish. 
Now its source has 
gone, and its effects are gone as well. 


w 240 W3 2. 
The world was made as an attack on God. 
It symbolizes 
fear. 
And what is fear except love's absence? Thus the world was 
meant to be a place where God could enter not, and where His Son 
could be apart from Him. 
Here was perception born, for knowledge 
could not cause such insane thoughts. 
But eyes deceive, and ears 
hear falsely. 
Now mistakes become quite possible, for certainty has 
gone. 


W 240 W3 3. 
The mechanisms of illusion have been born instead. 
And 
now they go to find what has been given them to seek. 
Their aim is 
to fulfill the purpose which the world was made to witness and 
make real. 
They see in its illusions but a solid base where truth ex¬ 
ists, upheld apart from lies. 
Yet everything which they report is but 
illusion which is kept apart from truth. 


w 240 W3 4. 
As sight was made to lead away from truth, it can be re¬ 
directed. 
Sounds become the call of God, and 654 all perception can 
be given a new purpose by the One Whom God appointed Savior to 
the world. 
Follow His light and see the world as He beholds it. 


Hear His Voice alone in all that speaks to you. 
And let Him give 
you peace and certainty, which you have thrown away, but Heaven 
has preserved for you in Him. 


W 240 W3 5. 
Let us not rest content until the world has joined our 
changed perception. 
Let us not be satisfied until forgiveness has 
been made complete. 
And let us not attempt to change our func- 


654 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here which handwritten editing changes to a comma. 

We agree with the handwriting. 



1509 


11-505 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


tion. 
We must save the world. 
For we who made it must behold it 
through the eyes of Christ, that what was made to die can be re¬ 
stored to Everlasting Life. 
W(485) 


11-506 


PROOF 


1510 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 241 "This holy instant is salvation come." 

w 241L l. 
What joy there is today! It is a time of special celebration. 

For today holds 655 out the instant to the darkened world where its 
release is set. 
The day has come when sorrows pass away and pain 
is gone. 
The glory of salvation dawns today upon a world set free. 

This is the time of hope for countless millions. 
They will be united 
now, as you forgive them all. 
Fori will be forgiven by you today. 


w 241 L 2 . 
"We have forgiven one another now, and so we come at last 
to Yon again. 
Father, Your Son, who never left, returns to Heaven and 
his home. 
How glad are we to have our sanity restored to us, and to 
remember that we all are one." W(486) 


655 Originally typed “hold”, the handwritten mark-up suggests (holds) so the statement changes from an 
injunction to “hold out the instant” to a statement that “today holds out the instant.” This is what it is in 
the Notes and also in FIP. 



1511 


11-507 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 242 "This day is God's. 
It is my gift to Him." 

W 242 L 1. 
I will not lead my life alone today. 
I do not understand 
the world. 
And so to try to lead my life alone must be but foolish¬ 
ness. 
For 656 there is One Who knows all that is best for me. 
And He 
is glad to make no choices for me but the ones that lead to God. 


This day I give 657 to Him, for I would not delay my coming home, 
and it is He Who knows the way to Him. 


w 242 L 2 . 
"And so we give today to Yon. 
We come with wholly open 
minds. 
We do not ask for anything that we may think we want. 
Give 
us what You would have received by us. 
You know all our desires and 
our needs. 
658 And You will give us everything we want and that will 
help us 659 find the way to You." W(487) 


656 Handwritten mark-up suggests (But). 


657 Handwritten mark-up suggests changing “This day I give” to (I give this day). 


658 Handwritten mark-up suggests (wants). 


659 Handwritten mark-up suggests(we need in helping us to) in place of “we want and that will help 
us”. 
The Notes has “want.” 


11-508 


1512 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 243 "Today I will judge nothing that occurs." 

W 243 L 1. 
I will be honest with myself today. 
I will not think that I 
already know what must remain beyond my present grasp. 
I will 
not think I understand the whole from bits of my perception, which 
are all that I can see. 
Today I recognize that this is so. 
And so I am 
relieved of judgment 660 which I cannot make. 
Thus do I free myself 
and what I look upon, to be in peace as God created us. 


w 243 L 2. 
" Father, today I leave creation free to be itself. 
I honor all 
the 661 parts, in which I am included. 
We are one because each part con¬ 
tains Your memory, and truth must shine in all of us as one." W(488) 


660 Handwritten mark-up suggests making “judgment” plural (judgments). 


661 Handwritten mark-up suggests (its) instead of “the” 


1513 


11-509 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 244 "I am in danger nowhere in the world." 

w 244 L l. 
"Your Son is safe wherever he may be, for You are there 
with him. 
He need but call upon Your Name, and he will recollect 
his safety and Your Love, for they are one. 
How can he fear or 
doubt or fail to know he cannot suffer, be endangered, or experience 
unhappiness, when he belongs to You, beloved and loving, in the 
safety of Your Fatherly embrace?" 

W 244 L 2. 
And there we are in truth. 
No storms can come into the 
hallowed haven of our home. 
In God are we secure. 
For what can 
come to threaten God Himself, or make afraid what will forever be a 
part of Him? W(489) 


11-510 


1514 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 245 "Your peace is with me. 
Father. 
I am safe." 

W245L1. 
"Your peace surrounds me. 
Father. 
Where I go. 
Your 
peace goes there with me. 
It sheds its light on everyone I meet. 
I 
bring it to the desolate and lonely and afraid. 
I give Your peace to 
those who suffer pain, or grieve for loss, or think they are bereft of 
hope and happiness. 
Send them to me, my Father. 
Let me bring 
Your peace with me. 
For I would save Your Son, as is Your Will, 
that I may come to recognize my Self." 

w 245 L 2. 
And so we go in peace. 
To all the world we give the mes¬ 
sage that we have received. 
And thus we come to hear the Voice of 
God, Who speaks to us as we relate Flis Word; Whose Love we rec¬ 
ognize because we share the Word that Fie has given unto us. 
W(490) 


1515 


11-511 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 246 "To love my Father is to love His Son." 

w 246 L l. 
Let me not think that I can find the way to God if I have 
hatred in my heart. 
662 Let me not try to hurt God's Son and think 
that I can know his Father or my Self. 
Let me not fail to recognize 
myself, and still believe that my awareness can contain my Father; 
or my mind conceive of all the love my Father has for me, and all 
the love which I return to Fhm. 


w 246 L 2 . 
"I will accept the way You choose for me to come to You, my 
Father. 
For in that will I succeed, because it is Your Will. 
And I 
would recognize that what You will is what I will as well, and only 
that. 
And so I choose to love Your Son. 
Amen." W(49i) 


662 1 John 2:9 He who says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness until now. 


1 John 4:20 If someone says, “I love God,” and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he who does not love 
his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? 


11-512 


1516 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 247 "Without forgiveness I will still be blind." 

W 247 L 1 . 
Sin is the symbol of attack. 
Behold it anywhere, and I will 
suffer. 
For forgiveness is the only means whereby Christ's vision 
comes to me. 
Let me accept what His sight shows me as the simple 
truth, and I am healed completely. 
Brother, come and let me look 
on you. 
Your loveliness reflects my own. 
Your sinlessness is mine. 

You stand forgiven, and I stand with you. 


w 247 L 2 . 
"So would I look on everyone today. 
My brothers are Your 
Sons. 
Your Fatherhood created them, and gave them all to me as part 
of You and my own Self as well. 
Today I honor You through them, and 
thus I hope this day to recognize my Self" W(492) 


1517 


11-513 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 248 "Whatever suffers is not part of me." 

w 248 L l. 
I have disowned the truth. 
Now let me be as faithful in 
disowning falsity. 
Whatever suffers is not part of me. 
What grieves 
is not myself. 
What is in pain is but illusion in my mind. 
What dies 
was never living in reality, and did but mock the truth about myself. 

Now I disown self-concepts and deceits and lies about the holy Son 
of God. 
Now am I ready to accept him back as God created him, 
and as he is. 


W 248 L 2. 
" Father, my ancient love for You returns, and lets me love 
Your Son again as well. 
Father, I am as You created me. 
Noiv is Your 
Love remembered, and my own. 
Now do I understand that they are 
one." W(493) 


11-514 


1518 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 249 "Forgiveness ends all suffering and loss." 

w 249 L l. 
Forgiveness paints a picture of a world where suffering is 
over, loss becomes impossible and anger makes no sense. 
Attack is 
gone, and madness has an end. 
What suffering is now conceivable? 
What loss can be sustained? The world becomes a place of joy, 
abundance, charity and endless giving. 
It is now so like to Heaven, 
that it quickly is transformed into the Light which it reflects. 
And so 
the journey which the Son of God began has ended in the Light from 
Which he came. 


W 249 L 2. 
" Father, we would return our minds to you. 
We have be¬ 
trayed them; held them in a vise of bitterness, and frightened them with 
thoughts of violence and death. 
Now would we rest again in You, as 
You created us." W(494) 


1519 


11-515 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 250 "Let me not see myself as limited." 

w 250 L l. 
Let me behold the Son of God today, and witness to his 
glory. 
Let me not try to obscure the holy light in him, and see his 
strength diminished and reduced to frailty; nor perceive the lacks in 
him with which I would attack his sovereignty. 


w 250 L 2 . 
"He is Your Son, my Father. 
And today I would behold his 
gentleness instead of my illusions. 
He is what I am, and as I see him so 
I see myself. 
Today I would see truly, that this day I may at last iden¬ 
tify with him." W(495) 


11-516 


1520 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


(4) What is Sin? (W250 W4) 

W 250 W4 1 . 
Sin is insanity. 
It is the means by which the mind is 
driven mad, and seeks to let illusions take the place of truth. 
And 
being mad, it sees illusions where 663 truth should be, and where it 
really is. 
Sin gave the body eyes, for what is there the sinless would 
behold? What need have they of sights or sounds or touch? What 
would they hear or reach to grasp? What would they sense at all? 

To sense is not to know. 
And truth can be but filled with knowl¬ 
edge, and with nothing else. 


W 250 W4 2. 
The body is the instrument the mind made in its striv¬ 
ing 664 to deceive itself. 
Its purpose is to strive. 
Yet can the goal of 
striving change. 
And now the body serves a different aim for striv¬ 
ing. 
What it seeks for now is chosen by the aim the mind has taken 
as replacement for the goal of self-deception. 
Truth can be its aim as 
well as lies. 
The senses then will seek instead for witnesses to what 
is true. 


W 250 W4 3. 
Sin is the home of all illusions, which but stand for 
things imagined, issuing from thoughts which 665 are untrue. 
They 
are the "proof" that what has no reality is real. 
Sin "proves" God's 
Son is evil; timelessness must have an end; eternal Life must die. 


And God Himself has lost the Son He loves, with but corruption to 
complete Himself, His Will forever overcome by death, love slain by 
hate, and peace to be no more. 


W 250 W4 4. 
A madman's dreams are frightening, and sin appears 
indeed to terrify. 
And yet what sin perceives is but a childish game. 

The Son of God may play he has become a body, prey to evil and to 
guilt, with but a little life that ends in death. 
But all the while his 
Father shines on him, and loves him with an everlasting Love Which 
his pretenses cannot change at all. 
666 

663 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 


664 Handwritten mark-up suggests (efforts) in place of “striving”. 


4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (that). 


666 Jeremiah 31:3 The LORD has appeared of old to me, saying: 

“Yes, I have loved you with an everlasting love; 

Therefore with lovingkindness I have drawn you. 



1521 


11-517 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


W 250 W4 5. 
How long, oh Son of God, will you maintain the game of 
sin? 667 Shall we not put away these sharp-edged children's toys? 
How soon will you be ready to come home? Perhaps today? There 
is no sin. 
Creation is unchanged. 
Would you still hold return to 
Heaven back? How long, oh holy Son of God, how long? W(496) 


667 Psalm 13:1 How long, O LORD? Will You forget me forever? How long will You hide Your face 
from me? 

Psalm 89:46 How long, LORD? Will You hide Yourself forever? Will Your wrath bum like fire? 


11-518 


1522 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 251 "I am in need of nothing but the truth." 

W 251 L 1. 
I sought for many things, and found despair. 
Now do I 
seek but one, for in that one is all I need, and only what I need. 
All 
that I sought before I needed not, and did not even want. 
My only 
need I did not recognize. 
But now I see that I need only truth. 
In 
that, all needs are satisfied, all cravings end, all hopes are finally ful¬ 
filled and dreams are gone. 
Now have I everything that I could 
need. 
Now have I everything that I could want. 
And now at last I 
find myself at peace. 


W 251 L 2. 
"And for that peace, our Father, we give thanks. 
What we 
denied ourselves You have restored, and only that is what we really 
want." W(497) 


1523 


11-519 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 252 "The Son of God is my Identity." 

w 252 L l. 
My Self is holy beyond all the thoughts of holiness of 
which I now conceive. 
Its shimmering and perfect purity is far more 
brilliant than is any light that I have ever looked upon. 
Its love is 
limitless, with an intensity which holds all things within it in the 
calm of quiet certainty. 
Its strength comes not from burning im¬ 
pulses which move the world, but from the boundless Love of God 
Himself. 
How far beyond this world my Self must be, and yet how 
near to me and close to God. 


w 252 L 2. 
" Father , You know my true Identity. 
Reveal It now to me 
who am Your Son, that I may waken to the truth in You, and know 
that Heaven is restored to me." W(498) 


11-520 


1524 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 253 "My Self is ruler of the universe." 

W 253 L 1 . 
It is impossible that anything should come to me unbid¬ 
den by myself. 
Even in this world, it is I who rule my destiny. 

What happens is what I desire. 
What does not occur is what I do 
not want to happen. 
This must I accept. 
For thus am I led past this 
world to my creations, children of my Will, in Heaven where my 
holy Self abides with them, and Him Who has created me. 


w 253 L 2 . 
"You are the Self Whom You created Son, creating like 
Yourself and one with You. 
My Self, Which rides the universe, is but 
Your Will in perfect union with my own, Which can but offer glad as¬ 
sent to Yours, that It may be extended to Itself." W(499) 


1525 


11-521 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 254 "Let every voice but God's be still in me." 

w 254 L l. 
" Father, today I woidd but hear Your Voice. 
In deepest si¬ 
lence I woidd come to You, to hear Your Voice and to receive Your 
Word. 
I have no prayer but this: I come to You to ask You for the 
truth. 
And truth is but Your Will, Which I would share with You to¬ 
day. 
" 

w 254 L 2. 
Today we let no ego 668 thoughts direct our words or ac¬ 
tions. 
When such thoughts occur, we quietly step back and look at 
them, and then we let them go. 
We do not want what they would 
bring with them. 
And so we do not choose to keep them. 
They are 
silent now. 
And in the stillness, hallowed by His Love, God speaks 
to us and tells us of our Will , 669 as we have chosen to remember 
Him. 
W(500) 


668 Originally typed “evil”, the handwritten mark-up suggests (ego) in place of “evil”. 
The Notes has 
“ego.” 

669 Handwritten mark-up suggests (will). 



11-522 


1526 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 255 "This day I choose to spend in perfect peace." 

w 255 L l. 
It does not seem to me that I can choose to have but peace 
today. 
And yet my God assures me that His Son is like Himself. 
Let 
me this day have faith in Him Who says I am God's Son. 
And let the 
peace I choose be mine today bear witness to the truth of what He 
says . 
670 God's Son can have no cares, and must remain forever in the 
peace of Heaven. 
In His Name I give today to finding what my Fa¬ 
ther wills for me, accepting it as mine, and giving it to all my Fa¬ 
ther's Sons, along with me. 


w 255 L 2 . 
"And so, my Father, woidd I pass this day with You. 
Your 
Son has not forgotten You. 
The peace You gave him still is in his 
mind, and it is there I choose to spend today." W(50i) 


670 John 1:7-8 This man came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all through him might 
believe. 
He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light. 


John 18:37 Pilate therefore said to Him, “Are You a king then?” 

Jesus answered, “You say rightly that I am a king. 
For this cause I was bom, and for this cause I have 
come into the world, that I should bear witness to the tmth. 
Everyone who is of the tmth hears My 
voice.” 


1527 


11-523 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 256 "God is the only goal I have today." 

w 256 L l. 
The way to God is through forgiveness here. 
There is no 
other way. 
If sin had not been cherished by the mind, what need 
would there have been to find a 671 way to where you are? Who 
would still be uncertain? Who could be unsure of who he is? And 
who would yet remain asleep in heavy clouds of doubt about the 
holiness of him whom God created sinless? Here we can but dream. 

But we can dream we have forgiven him in whom all sin remains 
impossible, and it is this we choose to dream today. 
God is our 
goal; forgiveness is the means by which our minds return to Him at 
last. 


w 256 L 2. 
"And so, our Father, would we come to You in Your ap¬ 
pointed way. 
We have no goal except to hear Your Voice, and find the 
way Your sacred Word has pointed out to us." W(502) 


671 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 



11-524 


1528 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 257 "Let me remember what my purpose is." 

W 257 LI. 
If I forget my goal, I can be but confused, unsure of what I 
am, and thus conflicted in my actions. 
No-one can serve contradict¬ 
ing goals and serve them well. 
Nor can he function without deep 
distress and great depression. 
Let us therefore be determined to 
remember what we want today, that we may unify our thoughts 
and actions meaningfully, and achieve only what God would have 
us do today . 
672 

w 257 L 2 . 
"Father, forgiveness is Your chosen means for our salvation. 

Let us not forget 673 that we can have no will but Yours today. 
And 
thus our purpose must be Yours as well, if we woidd reach the peace 
You will for us." W(503) 


672 Handwritten mark-up suggests (this day). 


673 Handwritten mark-up suggests inserting (today). 



1529 


11-525 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 258 "Let me remember that my goal is God." 

W 258 L 1. 
All that is needful is to train our minds to overlook all lit¬ 
tle, senseless aims, and to remember that our goal is God. 
His 
memory is hidden in our minds, obscured but by our pointless little 
goals which offer nothing and do not exist. 
Shall we continue to al¬ 
low God's grace to shine in unawareness, while the toys and trinkets 
of the world are sought instead? God is our only goal, our only 
Love. 
We have no aim but to remember Him. 


W258 L 2 . 
"Our goal is but to follow in the way that leads to You. 
We 
have no goal but this. 
What could we want but to remember You? 
What could we seek but our Identity?" W(504) 


11-526 


1530 

PROOF COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 259 "Let me remember that there is no sin." 

w 259 L l. 
Sin is the only thought that makes the goal of God seem 
unobtainable. 
What else could blind us to the obvious, and make 
the strange and the distorted seem more clear? What else but sin 
engenders our attacks? What else but sin could be the source of 
guilt, demanding punishment and suffering? And what but this 
could be the source of fear, obscuring God's creation; giving love the 
attributes of fear and of attack? 

w 259 L 2. 
" Father , I would not be insane today. 
I would not be afraid 
of love, nor seek for refuge in its opposite. 
For love can have no oppo¬ 
site. 
You are the Source of everything that is. 
And everything that is 
remains with You and You with it." W(505) 


1531 


11-527 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 260 "Let me remember God created me." 

w 260 L l. 
" Father, I did not make myself, although in my insanity I 
thought I did. 
Yet, as Your Thought, I have not left my Source, re¬ 
maining part of What created me. 
Your Son, my Father, calls on You 
today. 
Let me remember You created me. 
Let me remember my Iden¬ 
tity. 
And let my sinlessness arise again before Christ's vision, through 
which I would look upon my brothers and myself today." 

W 260 L 2. 
Now is our Source remembered, and Therein we find our 
true Identity at last. 
Holy indeed are we, because our Source can 
know no sin. 
And we who are His Sons are like each other, and 
alike to Him. 
W(506) 


11-528 


1532 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


(5) What is the Body? (W 260 W5) 


w 260 W5 l. 
The body is a fence the Son of God imagines he has built 
to separate parts of his Self from other parts. 
It is within this fence 
he thinks he lives, to die as it decays and crumbles. 
For within this 
fence he thinks that he is safe from love. 
Identifying with his safety, 
he regards himself as what his safety is. 
How else could he be cer¬ 
tain he remains within the body, keeping love outside? 

w 260 W5 2. 
The body will not stay. 
Yet this he sees as double 
"safety". 
For the Son of God's impermanence is "proof" his fences 
work, and do the task his mind assigns to them. 
For if his oneness 
still remained untouched, who could attack and who could be at¬ 
tacked? Who could be victor? Who could be his prey? Who could 
be victim? Who the murderer? And if he did not die, what "proof" 
is there that God’s eternal Son has been 674 destroyed? 

W 260 W5 3. 
The body is a dream. 
Like other dreams, it sometimes 
seems to picture happiness, but can quite suddenly revert to fear, 
where every dream is born. 
For only love creates in truth, and truth 
can never fear. 
Made to be fearful, must the body serve the purpose 
given it. 
But we can change the purpose which the body will obey 
by changing what we think that it is for. 


w 260 W5 4. 
The body is the means by which God’s Son returns to 
sanity. 
Though it was made to fence him into hell without escape, 
yet has the goal of Heaven been exchanged for the pursuit of hell. 

The Son of God extends his hand to reach his brother, and to help 
him walk along the road with him. 
Now is the body holy. 
Now it 
serves to heal the mind that it was made to kill. 


W 260 W5 5. 
You will identify with what you think will make you 
safe. 
Whatever it may be, you will believe that it is one with you. 

Your safety lies in truth and not in lies. 
Love is your safety. 
Fear 
does not exist. 
Identify with love, and you are safe. 
Identify with 
love, and you are home. 
Identify with love, and find your Self. 



W(507) 


674 


Handwritten mark-up suggests (can be). 



1533 


11-529 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 261 "God is my refuge and security." 

W 261 L 1. 
I will identify with what I think is refuge and security. 
I 
will behold myself where I perceive my strength, and think I live 
within the citadel where I am safe, and cannot be attacked. 
Let me 
today seek not security in danger, nor attempt to find my peace in 
murderous attack. 
I live in God. 
In Him I find my refuge and my 
strength . 
675 In Him is my Identity. 
In Him is everlasting peace. 


And only there will I remember Who I really am. 


w 261 L 2. 
"Let me not seek 676 for idols. 
677 I would come, my Father, 
home to You today. 
I choose to be as You created me, and find the Son 
whom You created as my Self ." 678 W(508) 


673 Psalm 46:1 God is our refuge and strength, A very present help in trouble. 


676 The Urtext manuscript says “speak” but handwriting (this appears not to be Helen’s hand) crosses it 
out and puts (seek) which does seem to make more sense. 
This is also what the Notes has. 


677 Hosea 4:12 My people seek advice from their wooden idols, and their rod declares to them. 
For the 
spirit of harlotry has caused them to go astray, and they have gone lusting away from under their God. 


678 Genesis 1:27 And God created man in His image; in the image of God He created him. 
He created 
them male and female. 



11-530 


1534 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 262 "Let me perceive no differences today." 

w 262 L l. 
" Father, You have one Son. 
And it is he that I woidd look 
upon today. 
He is Your one creation. 
Why should I perceive a thou¬ 
sand forms in what remains as one? Wiry shoidd I give this one a 
thousand names, when only one suffices? For Your Son must bear 
Your Name, for You created him. 
Let me not see him as a stranger to 
his Father, nor as stranger to myself. 
For he is part of me and I of him, 
and we are part of You Who are our Source, eternally united in Your 
Love; eternally the holy Son of God." 

W 262 L 2. 
We who are one would recognize this day the truth about 
ourselves. 
We would come home, and rest in unity. 
For there is 
peace, and nowhere else can peace be sought and found . 
679 W(509) 


679 Psalms 34:14 Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it. 



1535 


11-531 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 263 "My holy vision sees all things as pure." 

w 263 L l. 
" Father, Your Mind created all that is, Your Spirit entered 
into it; Your Love gave life to it. 
And umdd I look upon what You cre¬ 
ated as if it coidd be made sinfid? I umdd not perceive such dark and 
fearfid images. 
A madman's dream is hardly fit to be my choice, in¬ 
stead of all the loveliness with which You blessed creation; all its pu¬ 
rity, its joy, and its eternal, qiriet home in You ." 
w 263 L 2. 
And while we still remain outside the gate of Heaven, let 
us look on all we see through holy vision and the eyes of Christ. 
Let 
all appearances seem pure to us, that we may pass them by in inno¬ 
cence, and walk together to our Father's house as brothers and the 
holy Sons of God . 
680 W(510) 


680 John 14:2 In My Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you. 
I go to 
prepare a place for you. 



11-532 


1536 

PROOF COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 264 "I am surrounded by the Love of God." 

w 264 L l. 
" Father, You stand before me and behind, beside me, in the 
place I see myself, and everywhere I go . 
681 You are in all the things I 
look upon, the sounds I hear, and every hand that reaches for my own. 

In You time disappears, and place becomes a meaningless belief. 
For 
what surrounds Your Son and keeps him safe is Love Itself. 
There is no 
Source but This, and nothing is that does not share Its holiness; that 
stands beyond Your one creation, or without the Love Which holds all 
things within Itself. 
Father, Your Son is like Yourself. 
We come to 
You in Your own Name today, to be at peace within Your everlasting 
Love." 

W 264 L 2. 
My brothers, join with me in this today. 
This is salvation's 
prayer. 
Must we not join in what will save the world, along with 
us? W(511) 


681 Psalm 139:5 You have hedged me behind and before, And laid Your hand upon me. 



1537 


11-533 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 265 "Creation's gentleness is all I see." 

w 265 L l. 
I have indeed misunderstood the world, because I laid my 
"sins" on it, and saw them looking back at me. 
How fierce they 
seemed! And how deceived was I to think that what I feared was in 
the world, instead of in my mind alone. 
Today I see the world in the 
celestial gentleness with which creation shines. 
There is no fear in it. 

Let no appearance of my "sins" obscure the light of Heaven, shining 
on the world. 
What is reflected here is in God's Mind. 
The images I 
see reflect my thoughts. 
Yet is my mind at one with God's. 
And so I 
can perceive creation's gentleness. 


W 265 L 2. 
"In quiet would. 
I look upon the world, which hut reflects 
Your Thoughts and mine as well. 
Let me remember that they are the 
same, and I will see creation's gentleness." W(512) 


11-534 


1538 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 266 "My holy Self abides in you, God's Son." 

w 266 L l. 
" Father, You gave me all Your Sons, to be my Saviors and 
my Counselors in sight; the Bearers of Your holy Voice to me. 
In them 
are You reflected, and in them does Christ look back upon me from my 
Self. 
Let not Your Son forget Your holy Name. 
Let not Your Son for¬ 
get his holy Source. 
Let not Your Son forget his name is Yours." 
w 266 L 2. 
This day we enter into paradise, 682 calling upon God's 
Name and on our own, acknowledging our Self in each of us; united 
in the holy Love of God. 
How many Saviors God has given us! 

How can we lose the way to Him, when He has filled the world 
with those who point to Him, and given us the sight to look on 
them? W(513) 


682 Luke 23:43 And Jesus said to hint, “Assuredly, I say to you, today you will be with Me in Paradise.” 


1539 


11-535 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 267 "My heart is beating in the peace of God." 

W 267 L 1 . 
Surrounding me is all the life that God created in His 
Love. 
It calls to me in every heartbeat and in every breath; in every 
action and in every thought. 
Peace fills 683 my heart, and floods my 
body with the purpose of forgiveness. 
Now my mind is healed, and 
all I need to save the world is given me. 
Each heartbeat brings me 
peace; each breath infuses me with strength. 
I am a messenger of 
God, directed by His Voice, sustained by Him in love, and held for¬ 
ever quiet and at peace within His loving arms. 
Each heartbeat calls 
His Name, and every one is answered by His Voice, assuring me I 
am at home in Him. 


W 267 L 2. 
"Let me attend Your Answer, not my own. 
Father, my 
heart is beating in the peace the Heart of Love created. 
It is there and 
only there that I can be at home." W(514) 


683 The Urtext manuscript has “stills” corrected by handwriting to “fills” which is what is in the Notes. 



11-536 


1540 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 268 "Let all things be exactly as they are." 

w 268 L l. 
"Let me not be Your critic, Lord, today, and judge against 
You. 
Let me not attempt to interfere with Your creation, and distort it 
into sickly forms. 
Let me be willing to withdraw my wishes from its 
unity, and thus to let it be as You created it. 
For thus will I be able, 
too, to recognize my Self as You created me. 
In Love was I created, and 
in Love will I remain forever. 
What can frighten me when I let all 
things be exactly as they are?" 

w 268 L 2. 
Let not our sight be blasphemous today, nor let our ears 
attend to lying tongues. 
Only reality is free of pain. 
Only reality is 
free of loss. 
Only reality is wholly safe. 
And it is only this we seek 
today. 
W(515) 


1541 


11-537 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 269 "My sight goes forth to look upon Christ's face." 

w 269 L l. 
"I ask Your blessing on my sight today. 
It is the means 
which You have chosen to become the way to show me my mistakes, 
and look beyond them. 
It is given me to find a new perception through 
the Guide You gave to me. 
And through His lessons to surpass percep¬ 
tion and return to truth. 
I ask for the illusion which transcends all 
those I made. 
Today I choose to see a world forgiven, in which every¬ 
one shows me the face of Christ, and teaches me that what I look upon 
belongs to me; that nothing is, except Your holy Son." 
w 269 L 2. 
Today our sight is blessed indeed. 
We share one vision, as 
we look upon the face of Him Whose Self is ours. 
We are one be¬ 
cause of Him Who is the Son of God; of Him Who is our own Iden¬ 
tity. 
W(516) 


11-538 


1542 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 270 "I will not use the body's eyes today." 

w 270 L l. 
" Father, Christ's vision is Your gift to me, and it has power 
to translate all that the body’s eyes behold into the sight of a forgiven 
world. 
How glorious and gracious is this world! Yet how much more 
will I perceive in it than sight can give. 
The world forgiven signifies 
Your Son acknowledges his Father, lets his dreams be brought to truth, 
and waits expectantly the one remaining instant more of time, which 
ends forever as Your memory returns to him. 
And now his will is one 
with Yours. 
His function now is but Your own, and every thought ex¬ 
cept Your own is gone." 

W 270 L 2. 
The quiet of today will bless our hearts, and through them 
peace will come to everyone. 
Christ is our eyes today. 
And through 
His sight we offer healing to the world through Him, the holy Son 

whom God created whole; the holy Son whom God created one. 

W(517) 


1543 


11-539 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


(6) What is the Christ? (W 270 W6) 

w 270 W61 . 
Christ is God's Son as He created him. 
He is the Self we 
share, uniting us with one another, and with God as well. 
He is the 
Thought Which still abides within the Mind That is His Source. 
He 
has not left His holy home, nor lost the innocence in which He was 
created. 
He abides unchanged forever in the Mind of God. 

w 270 W6 2. 
Christ is the link that keeps you one with God, and guar¬ 
antees that separation is no more than an illusion of despair. 
For 
hope forever will abide in Him. 
Your mind is part of His, and His of 
yours. 
He is the part in Which God's Answer lies; where all deci¬ 
sions are already made, and dreams are over. 
He remains un¬ 
touched by anything the body's eyes perceive. 
For though in Him 
His Father placed the means for your salvation, yet does He remain 
the Self Who, like His Father, knows no sin. 


w 270 W6 3. 
Home of the Holy Spirit, and at home in God alone, does 
Christ remain at peace, within the Heaven of your holy mind. 
This 
is the only part of you that has reality in truth. 
The rest is dreams. 

Yet will these dreams be given unto Christ to fade before His glory, 
and reveal your holy Self, the Christ, to you at last, 
w 270 W6 4. 
The Holy Spirit reaches from the Christ in you to all your 
dreams, and bids them come to Him, to be translated into truth. 
He 
will exchange them for the final dream which God appointed as the 
end of dreams. 
For when forgiveness rests upon the world and 
peace has come to every Son of God, what could remain 684 to keep 
things separate, for what remains to see except Christ's face? 685 

w 270 W6 5. 
And how long will this holy face be seen, when it is but 
the symbol that the time for learning now is over, and the goal of the 
Atonement has been reached at last? So therefore let us seek to find 
Christ's face, and look on nothing else. 
As we behold His glory, will 
we know we have no need of learning or perception or of time, or 


684 Handwritten mark-up suggests (there be) in place of “remain”. 
The Notes has “remain.” 

685 2 Corinthians 4:6 Seeing it is God, that said, Light shall shine out of darkness, who shined in our 
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 



11-540 


1544 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


anything except the holy Self, the Christ Whom God created as His 
Son. 
W(518) 


PROOF 


1545 


COPY 


11-541 


Part 2 


Lesson 271 "Christ's is the vision I will use today." 

W 271 L 1. 
Each day, each hour, every instant, I am choosing what I 
want to look upon, the sounds I want to hear, the witnesses to what 
I want to be the truth for me. 
Today I choose to look upon what 
Christ would have me see, to listen to God's Voice, and seek the 
witnesses to what is true in God's creation. 
In Christ's sight, the 
world and God's creation meet, and as they come together all per¬ 
ception disappears. 
His kindly sight redeems the world from death. 

For nothing that He looks upon on but must live, remembering the 
Father and the Son; Creator and Creation unified. 


W 271 L 2. 
" Father , Christ's vision is the way to You. 
What He be¬ 
holds invites Your memory to be 686 restored to me. 
And this I choose to 
be what I woidd look upon today." W(519) 


686 The word “be” is not in the Urtext manuscript which has a grammatically impossible sentence here. 

FIP inserts “be” as do we, guessing this what was intended. 
The Notes also has this reading. 



11-542 


1546 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 272 "How can illusions satisfy God's Son?" 

w 272 L l. 
" Father, the truth belongs to me. 
My home is set in Heaven 
by Your Will and mine. 
Can dreams content me? Can illusions bring 
me happiness? What but Your memory can satisfy Your Son? I will 
accept no less than You have given me. 
I am surrounded by Your 
Love, forever still, forever gentle and forever safe. 
God's Son must be 
as You created him." 

w 272 L 2. 
Today we pass illusions by. 
And if we hear temptation 
call to us to stay and linger in a dream, we turn aside and ask our¬ 
selves if we, the Sons of God, could be content with dreams, when 
Heaven can be chosen just as easily as hell, and love will happily 
replace all fear. 
W(520) 


1547 


11-543 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 273 "The stillness of the peace of God is mine." 

W 273 L 1 . 
Perhaps we are now ready for a day of undisturbed tran¬ 
quility. 
If this is not yet feasible, we are content and even more than 
satisfied to learn how such a day can be achieved. 
If we give way to 
a disturbance, let us learn how to dismiss it and return to peace. 
We 
need but tell our minds, with certainty, "The stillness of the peace of 
God is mine," and nothing can intrude upon the peace that God 
Himself has given to His Son. 


W 273 L 2. 
" Father , Your peace is mine. 
What need have I to fear that 
anything can rob me of what You woidd have me keep? I cannot lose 
Your gifts to me. 
And so the peace You gave Your Son is with me still, 
in quietness and in my own eternal love for You." W(52i) 


11-544 


1548 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 274 "Today belongs to Love. 
Let me not fear." 

w 274 L l. 
" Father, today I would let all things be as You created them, 
and give Your Sons 687 the honor due their 688 sinlessness; the love of 
brother to his brother and his friend. 
Through this I am redeemed. 

Through this as well the truth will enter where illusions were, light 
will replace all darkness, and Your Son will know he is as You created 
him." 

w 274 L 2. 
A special blessing comes to us today from Him Who is our 
Father. 
Give this day to Him and there will be no fear today, be¬ 
cause the day is given unto Love. 
W(522) 


,,R7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Son) in place of “Sons” making the following pronoun “their” sin- 
gular (his) as well. 
The Notes has “and give Your Sons the honor due their holiness ; sinlessines s” 

688 Handwritten mark-up suggests (his). 



1549 

PROOF COPY 


11-545 




Part 2 


Lesson 275 "God's healing Voice protects all things today." 

w 275 L l. 
Let us today attend the Voice of God, Which speaks an 
ancient lesson, no more true today than any other day. 
Yet has this 
day been chosen as the time when we will seek and hear and learn 
and understand. 
Join me in hearing. 
For the Voice of God tells us of 
things we cannot understand alone, nor learn apart. 
It is in this that 
all things are protected. 
And in this the healing of the Voice of God 
is found. 


W 275 L 2. 
"Your healing Voice protects all things today, and so I 
leave all things to You. 
I need be anxious over nothing. 
For Your 
Voice will tell me what to do, and where to go; to whom to speak, and 
what to say to him; what thoughts to think; what words to give the 
world. 
The safety that I bring is given me. 
Father, Your Voice protects 
all things through me." W(523) 


11-546 


1550 

PROOF COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 276 "The Word of God is given me to speak." 

w 276 L l. 
What is the Word of God? "My Son is pure, and holy as 
Myself." And thus did God become the Father of the Son He loves, 
for thus was he created. 
This the Word His Son did not create with 
Him, because in this His Son was born. 
Let us accept His Father¬ 
hood, and all is given us. 
Deny we were created in His Love and we 
deny our Self, to be unsure of who we are, of who our Father is, and 
for what purpose we have come. 
And yet, we need but to acknowl¬ 
edge Him Who gave His Word to us in our creation, to remember 
Him and so 689 recall our Self. 


W 276 L 2. 
" Father, Your Word is mine. 
And it is this that I would 
speak to all my brothers, who are given me to cherish as my own, as I 
am loved and blessed and saved by You." W(524) 


689 Handwritten mark-up suggests (thus) in place of “so”. 



1551 


11-547 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 277 "Let me not bind Your Son with laws I made." 

w 277 L l. 
"Your Son is free, my Father. 
Let me not imagine I have 
hound him with the laws I made to rule the body. 
He is not subject to 
any laws I made by which I try to make the body more secure. 
He is 
not changed by what is changeable. 
He is not slave to any laws of time. 

He is as You created him, because he knows no laws except the Law of 
Love." 

W 277L 2. 
Let us not worship idols, nor believe in any laws idolatry 
would make to hide the freedom of the Son of God. 
He is not bound 
except by his beliefs. 
Yet what he is is far beyond his faith in slavery 
or freedom. 
He is free because he is his Father's Son. 
And he can 
not be bound unless God's Truth can lie, and God can will that He 
deceive Himself. 
W(525) 


11-548 


PROOF 


1552 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 278 "If I am bound, my Father is not free." 

W 278 LI. 
If I accept that I am prisoner within a body, in a world in 
which all things that seem to live appear to die, then is my Father 
prisoner with me. 
And this do I believe, when I maintain the laws 
the world obeys must I obey; the frailties and the sins which I per¬ 
ceive are real, and cannot be escaped. 
If I am bound in any way, I 
do not know my Father or my Self. 
And I am lost to all reality. 
For 
truth is free, and what is bound is not a part of truth. 


W 278 L 2. 
" Father , I ask for nothing but the truth. 
I have had many 
foolish thoughts about myself and my creation, and have brought a 
dream of fear into my mind. 
Today I would not dream. 
I choose the 
way to You instead of madness and instead of fear. 
For truth is safe 
and only love is sure." W(526) 


1553 


11-549 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 279 "Creation's freedom promises my own." 

w 279 L l. 
The end of dreams is promised me, because God's Son is 
not abandoned by His Love. 
Only in dreams is there a time when 
he appears to be in prison, and awaits a future freedom if it be at all. 

Yet in reality his dreams are gone, with truth established in their 
place. 
And now is freedom his already. 
Should I wait in chains 
which have been severed for release, when God is offering me free¬ 
dom now? 

W 279 L 2. 
"I will accept Your promises today, and give my faith to 
them. 
My Father loves the Son Whom He created as His Own. 
Would 
You withhold the gifts You gave to me?" W(527) 


11-550 


1554 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 280 "What limits can I lay upon God's Son?" 

W 280 L 1 . 
Whom God created limitless is free. 
I can invent impris¬ 
onment for him, but only in illusions, not in truth. 
No Thought of 
God has left Its Father's Mind. 
No Thought of God is limited at all. 

No Thought of God but is forever pure. 
Can I lay limits on the Son 
of God, whose Father willed that he be limitless, and like Fhmself in 
freedom and in love? 

W 280 L 2. 
"Today let me give honor to Your Son, for thus alone I find 
the way to You. 
Father, I lay no limits on the Son You love, and You 
created limitless. 
The honor that I give to him is Yours, and what is 
Yours belongs to me as well." W(528) 


1555 


11-551 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


(7) What is the Holy Spirit? (W 280 W7) 

W 280 W7 1 . 
The Holy Spirit mediates between illusions and the truth. 

As 690 He must bridge the gap between reality and dreams, percep¬ 
tion leads to knowledge through the grace that God has given Him, 
to be His gift to everyone who turns to Him for truth. 
Across the 
bridge that He provides are dreams all carried to the truth, to be 
dispelled before the light of knowledge. 
There are sights and 
sounds forever laid aside. 
And where they were perceived before, 
forgiveness has made possible perception's tranquil end. 

w 280 W7 2. 
The goal the Holy Spirit's teaching sets is just this end of 
dreams. 
For sights and sounds must be translated from the wit¬ 
nesses of fear to those of love. 
And when this is entirely accom¬ 
plished, learning has achieved the only goal it has in truth. 
For 
learning, as the Holy Spirit guides it to the outcome He perceives for 
it, becomes the means to go beyond itself, to be replaced by the 
Eternal Truth. 


W 280 W7 3. 
If you but knew how much your Father yearns to have 
you recognize your sinlessness, you would not let His Voice appeal 
in vain, nor turn away from His replacement for the fearful images 
and dreams you made. 
The Holy Spirit understands the means you 
made, by which you would attain what is forever unattainable . 
691 
And if you offer them to Him, He will employ the means you made 
for exile, to restore your mind to where it truly is at home. 


w 280 W7 4. 
From knowledge, where He has been placed by God, the 
Holy Spirit calls to you, to let forgiveness rest upon your dreams, 
and be restored to sanity and peace of mind. 
Without forgiveness 
will your dreams remain to terrify you. 
And the memory of all your 
Father's Love will not return to signify the end of dreams has come, 
w 280 W7 5. 
Accept your Father's gift. 
It is a call from Love to Love, 
that It be but Itself. 
The Holy Spirit is His gift, by Which the quiet- 


690 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Since) in place of “As”. 


991 The Urtext manuscript has “unobtainable” typed first and then corrected by hand to “unattainable” 
which is the reading in the Notes. 



11-552 


1556 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


ness of Heaven is restored to God's beloved Son. 
Would you refuse 
to take the function of completing God, when all He wills is that you 
be complete? W(529) 


PROOF 


1557 


COPY 


11-553 


Part 2 


Lesson 281 "I can be hurt by nothing but my thoughts." 

w 281 L l. 
" Father, Your Son is perfect. 
When he 692 thinks that he is 
hurt in any way, it is because he has forgotten who he is, 693 and that he 
is as You created him. 
Your Thoughts can only bring me happiness. 
If 
ever I am sad or hurt or ill, I have forgotten what You think, and put 
my little, meaningless ideas in place of where Your Thoughts belong, 
and where They are. 
I can be hurt by nothing but my thoughts. 
The 
Thoughts I think with You can only bless. 
The Thoughts I think with 
You alone are true." 

W 281 L 2. 
I will not hurt myself today. 
For I am far beyond all pain. 

My Father placed me safe in Heaven, watching over me. 
And I 
would not attack the Son He loves, for what He loves is 694 mine to 
love as well. 
W(530) 


6,2 This entire sentence is shifted in the mark-up to the First person: (When I think that I am hurt in any 
way, it is because I have forgotten who I am, and that I am as You created me.) 

693 In the Urtext manuscript, this comma is a period, a new sentence beginning with “And that he is ...” 

694 Handwritten mark-up suggests (also) here and deletes “as well” at the end of the sentence. 



11-554 


1558 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 282 "I will not be afraid of love today." 

W 282 LI. 
If I could realize but this today, salvation would be 
reached for all the world. 
This the decision not to be insane, and to 
accept myself as God Himself, my Father and my Source, created 
me. 
This the determination not to be asleep in dreams of death, 
while truth remains forever living in the joy of life . 
695 And this the 
choice to recognize the Self Whom God created as the Son He loves, 
and Who remains my one Reality. 


W 282 L 2. 
" Father , Your Name is Love, and so is mine. 
Such is the 
truth. 
And can the truth be changed by merely giving it another 
name? The name of fear is simply a mistake. 
Let me not be afraid of 
truth today ." W(53i) 


695 They Urtext manuscript shows “life” here, with (love) handwritten in. 
The Notes clearly has “life” 


however. 



1559 


11-555 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 283 "My true Identity abides in You." 

w 283 L l. 
" Father, I made an image of myself, and it is this I call the 
Son of God. 
Yet is creation as it always was, for Your creation is un¬ 
changeable. 
Let me not worship idols. 
I am he my Father loves. 
His 
holiness remains the light of Heaven and the Love of God. 
Is not what 
is beloved of You secure? Is not the light of Heaven infinite? Is not 
Your Son my true Identity, when You created everything that is?" 

W 283 L 2. 
Now are we one in shared Identity, with God our Father 
as our only Source, and everything created part of us. 
And so we 
offer blessing to all things, uniting lovingly with all the world, 
which our forgiveness has made one with us. 
W(532) 


11-556 


1560 

PROOF COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 284 "I can elect to change all thoughts that hurt." 

W 284 L 1 . 
Loss is not loss when properly perceived. 
Pain is impossi¬ 
ble. 
There is no grief with any cause at all 696 and suffering of any 
kind is nothing but a dream. 
Such 697 is the truth, at first to be but 
said, and then repeated many times, and next to be accepted as but 
partly true, with many reservations , 698 then to be considered seri¬ 
ously more and more, and finally accepted as the truth. 
I can elect 
to change all thoughts that hurt. 
And I would go beyond the 699 
words today, go 700 past all reservations, and arrive at full acceptance 
of the truth in them. 


W 284 L 2. 
" Father, what You have given cannot hurt, and 701 grief and 
pain must be impossible. 
Let me not fail to trust in You today, accept¬ 
ing but the joyous as Your gifts; accepting but the joyous as the truth." 
W(533) 


696 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here for some odd reason. 


697 Handwritten mark-up suggests (This). 


698 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break here which doesn’t seem like a good idea. 


699 Handwritten mark-up suggests (these) instead of “the”. 


700 Handwritten mark-up suggests (and) instead of “go”. 


701 Handwritten mark-up suggests (so) instead of “and”. 



1561 


11-557 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 285 "My holiness shines bright and clear today." 

w 285 L l. 
Today I wake with joy, expecting but the happy things of 
God to come to me. 
I ask but them to come and realize my invita¬ 
tions 702 will be answered by the thoughts to which they 703 have been 
sent by me. 
And I will ask for only joyous things, the instant I ac¬ 
cept my holiness. 
For what would be the use of pain to me; what 
purpose would my suffering fulfill; and how would grief and loss 
avail me, if insanity departs from me today, and I accept my holi¬ 
ness instead? 

w 285 L 2. 
" Father , my holiness is Yours. 
Let me rejoice in it, and 
through forgiveness be restored to sanity. 
Your Son is still as You cre¬ 
ated him. 
My holiness is part of me and also part of You. 
And what 
can alter Holiness Itself?" W(534) 


702 Handwritten mark-up suggests (invitation). 


703 Handwritten mark-up suggests (it). 



11-558 


1562 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 286 "The hush of Heaven holds my heart today." 

w 286 L l. 
" Father, how still today! How quietly do all things fall in 
place! This is the day that has been chosen as the time in which I come 
to understand the lesson that there is no need that I do anything. 
In 
You is every choice already made. 
In You has every conflict been re¬ 
solved. 
In You is everything I hope to find already given me. 
Your 
peace is mine. 
My heart is quiet, and my mind at rest. 
Your Love is 
Heaven, and Your Love is mine." 

w 286 L 2. 
The stillness of today will give us hope that we have 
found the way, and travelled far along it, to a wholly certain goal. 

Today we will not doubt the end which God Himself has promised 

us. 
We trust in Him, and in our Self, Who still is one with Him. 

W(535) 


PROOF 


1563 


COPY 


11-559 


Part 2 


Lesson 287 "You are my goal, my Father. 
Only You." 

w 287 L l. 
Where would I go but Heaven? What could be a substi¬ 
tute for happiness? What gift could I prefer before the peace of 
God? What treasure would I seek and find and keep that can com¬ 
pare with my Identity? And would I rather live with fear than love? 

W287L2. 
"You are my goal, my Father. 
What but You could I desire 
to have? What way but that which leads to You coidd I desire to walk? 
And what except the memory of You could signify to me the end of 
dreams and futile substitutions for the truth? You are my only goal. 

Your Son would be as You created Him. 
What way but this coidd I 
expect to recognize my Self, and be at one with my Identity?" W(536) 


11-560 


1564 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 288 "Let me forget my brother's past today." 

w 288 L l. 
"This is the thought that leads the way to You, and brings 
me to my goal. 
I cannot come to You without my brother. 
And to 
know my Source, I first must recognize what You created one with me. 

My brother's is the hand that leads me on the way to You. 
His sins are 
in the past along with mine, 704 and I am saved because the past is gone. 

Let me not cherish it within my heart, or I will lose the way to walk to 
You. 
My brother is my Savior. 
Let me not attack the Savior You have 
given me. 
But let me honor him who bears Your Name, and so remem¬ 
ber that It is my own." 

W 288 L 2. 
Forgive me, then, today. 
And you will know you have 
forgiven me if you behold your brother in the light of holiness. 
He 
cannot be less holy than can 705 1, and you can not be holier than he. 

W(537) 


7114 The Urtext manuscript has a period and sentence break here. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests a 
comma only, which we feel is correct. 
The Notes agrees, showing a full stop which is struck out. 

705 Handwritten mark-up suggests (am) in place of “can”. 



1565 


11-561 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 289 "The past is over. 
It can touch me not." 

W 289 L 1. 
Unless the past is over in my mind, the real world must 
escape my sight. 
For I am really looking nowhere; seeing but what 
is not there. 
How can I then perceive the world forgiveness offers? 
This the past was made to hide, for this the world that can be looked 
on only now. 
It has no past. 
For what can be forgiven but the past, 
and if it is forgiven it is gone. 


W 289 L 2. 
" Father , let me not look upon a past that is not there. 
For 
You have offered me Your own replacement, in a present world the past 
has left untouched and free of sin. 
Here is the end of guilt. 
And here 
am I made ready for Your final step. 
Shall I demand that You wait 
longer for Your Son to find the loveliness You planned to be the end of 
all his dreams and all his pain?" W(538) 


11-562 


1566 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 290 "My present happiness is all I see." 

W 290 L 1 . 
Unless I look upon what is not there, my present happi¬ 
ness is all I see. 
Eyes that begin to open see at last. 
And I would 
have Christ's vision come to me this very day. 
What I perceive 
without God's own correction for the sight I made is frightening and 
painful to behold. 
Yet I would not allow my mind to be deceived by 
the belief the dream I made is real an instant longer. 
This the day I 
seek my present happiness, and look on nothing else except the 
thing I seek. 


W 290 L 2. 
"With this resolve I come to You, and ask Your strength to 
hold me up today, while I but 706 do Your Will. 
You cannot fail to hear 
me, Father. 
What I ask have You already given me, and I am sure that 
I will see my happiness today." W(539) 


706 Handwritten mark-up suggests (seek to). 



1567 


11-563 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


(8) What is the Real World? (W290 W8) 


w 290 W8 l. 
The real world is a symbol, like the rest of what percep¬ 
tion offers. 
Yet it stands for what is opposite to what you made. 

Your world is seen through eyes of fear, and brings the witnesses of 
terror to your mind. 
The real world cannot be perceived except 
through eyes forgiveness blesses, so they see a world where terror is 
impossible, and witnesses to fear can not be found. 


W 290 W8 2. 
The real world holds a counterpart for each unhappy 
thought reflected in your world; a sure correction for the sights of 
fear and sounds of battle which your world contains. 
The real 
world shows a world seen differently, through quiet eyes and with a 
mind at peace. 
Nothing but rest is here. 
There are no cries of pain 
and sorrow heard, for nothing here remains outside forgiveness. 

And the sights are gentle. 
Only happy sights and sounds can reach 
the mind that has forgiven itself. 


W 290 W8 3. 
What need has such a mind for thoughts of death, attack 
and murder? What can it perceive surrounding it but safety, love 
and joy? What is there it would choose to be condemned, and what 
is there that it would judge against? The world it sees arises from a 
mind at peace within itself. 
No danger lurks in anything it sees, for 
it is kind and only kindness does it look upon. 


W 290 W8 4. 
The real world is the symbol that the dream of sin and 
guilt is over, and God's Son no longer sleeps. 
His waking eyes per¬ 
ceive the sure reflection of his Father's Love; the certain promise that 
he is redeemed. 
The real world signifies the end of time, for its per¬ 
ception makes time purposeless. 


w 290 W8 5. 
The Holy Spirit has no need of time when it has served 
His purpose. 
Now He waits but that one instant more for God to 
take His final step, and time has disappeared, taking perception 
with it as it goes, and leaving but the Truth to be Itself. 
That instant 
is our goal, for it contains the memory of God. 
And as we look 
upon a world forgiven, it is He Who calls to us and comes to take us 


11-564 


1568 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


home, reminding us of our Identity Which our forgiveness has re¬ 
stored to us. 
W(540) 

Lesson 291 "This is a day of stillness and of peace." 

W 291 L 1 . 
Christ's vision looks through me today. 
His sight shows 
me all things forgiven and at peace, and offers this same vision to 
the world. 
And I accept this vision in its name, both for myself and 
for the world as well. 
What loveliness we look upon today! What 
holiness we see surrounding us! And it is given us to recognize it is 
a holiness in which we share; it is the Holiness of God Himself. 


w 291 L 2 . 
"This day my mind is quiet, to receive the Thoughts You of¬ 
fer me. 
And I accept what comes from You instead of from myself. 
I do 
not know the way to You. 
But You are wholly certain. 
Father, lead 707 
Your Son along the quiet path that ends in 708 You. 
Let my forgiveness 
be complete, and let the memory of You return to me." W(54i) 


707 Handwritten mark-up suggests (guide). 


708 Handwritten mark-up suggests (leads to). 



1569 


11-565 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 292 "A happy outcome to all things is sure." 

w 292 L l. 
God's promises make no exceptions. 
And He guarantees 
that only joy can be the final outcome found for everything. 
Yet it is 
up to us when this is reached; how long we let an alien will appear 
to be opposing His. 
And while we think this will is real, we will not 
find the end He has appointed, as the outcome of all problems we 
perceive, all trials we see, and every situation that we meet. 
Yet is 
the ending certain. 
For God's Will is done in earth and Heaven. 
709 
We will seek and we will find according to His Will, Which guaran¬ 
tees that our will is done. 


w 292 L 2 . 
"We thank you, Father, for Your guarantee of only happy 
outcomes in the end. 
Help us not interfere, and so delay the happy 
endings You have promised us for every problem that we can perceive; 
for every trial we think we still must meet." W(542) 


7CW Matthew 6:10 “Your kingdom come. 
Your will be done On earth as it is in heaven.” 


11-566 


1570 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 293 "All fear is past and only love is here." 

w 293 L l. 
All fear is past because its source is gone, and all its 
thoughts gone with it. 
Love remains the only present state, whose 
Source is here forever and forever. 
Can the world seem bright and 
clear and safe and welcoming, with all my past mistakes oppressing 
it, and showing me distorted forms of pain 710 ? Yet in the present 
love is obvious, and its effects apparent. 
All the world shines in re¬ 
flection of its holy light, and I perceive a world forgiven at last. 


W 293 L 2. 
" Father , let not Your holy world escape my sight today. 

Nor let my ears he deaf to all the hymns of gratitude the world is sing¬ 
ing underneath the sounds of fear. 
There is a real world which the pre¬ 
sent holds safe from all past mistakes. 
And I umdd see only this world 
before my eyes today." W(543) 


710 Handwritten mark-up suggests (fear). 



1571 


11-567 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 294 "My body is a wholly neutral thing." 

W 294 L 1 . 
I am a Son of God. 
And can I be another thing as well? 

Did God create the mortal and corruptible? What use has God's be¬ 
loved Son for what must die? And yet a neutral thing does not see 
death, for thoughts of fear are not invested there, nor is a mockery 
of love bestowed upon it. 
Its neutrality protects it while it has a use. 

And afterwards, without a purpose, it is laid aside. 
It is not sick or 
old or hurt. 
It is but functionless, unneeded and cast off. 
Let me not 
see it more than this today; of service for a while and fit to serve, to 
keep its usefulness while it can serve, and then to be replaced for 
greater good. 


W 294 L 2. 
"My body, Father, cannot be Your Son. 
And what is not 
created cannot be sinful or sinless; neither good nor bad. 
Let me, then, 
use this dream to help Your plan that we awaken from all dreams we 
made." W(544) 


11-568 


1572 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 295 "The Holy Spirit looks through me today." 

w 295 L l. 
Christ asks that He may use my eyes today, and thus re¬ 
deem the world. 
He asks this gift that He may offer peace of mind 
to me, and take away all terror and all pain. 
And as they are re¬ 
moved from me, the dreams that seemed to settle on the world are 
gone. 
Redemption must be one. 
As I am saved, the world is saved 
with me. 
For all of us must be redeemed together. 
Fear appears in 
many different forms, but love is one. 


W 295 L 2. 
"My Father, Christ has asked a gift of me, and one I give 
that it be given me. 
Help me to use the eyes of Christ today, and thus 
allow the Holy Spirit's Love to bless all things that 711 1 may look upon, 
that His forgiving Love may rest on me." W(545) 


711 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 



1573 


11-569 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 296 "The Holy Spirit speaks through me today." 

w 296 L l. 
"The Holy Spirit needs my voice today, that all the world 
may listen to Your Voice, and hear Your Word through me. 
I am re¬ 
solved to let You speak through me, for I woidd use no words hut 
Yours, and have no thoughts which are apart from Yours, for only 
Yours are true. 
I woidd be Savior to the world I made. 
For having 
damned it, I would set it free that I may find escape, and hear the Word 
Your holy Voice will speak to me today." 

W 296 L 2. 
We teach today what we would learn, and that alone. 


And so our learning goal becomes an unconflicted one, and possible 
of easy reach and quick accomplishment. 
How gladly does the Holy 
Spirit come to rescue us from hell , 712 when we allow His teaching to 
persuade the world, through us, to seek and find the easy path to 
God! W(546) 


712 Psalms 144:7 Stretch forth thine hand from above; rescue me, and deliver me out of great waters, 
out of the hand of strangers; 


11-570 


1574 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 297 "Forgiveness is the only gift I give." 

w 297 L l. 
Forgiveness is the only gift I give because it is the only gift 
I want, and everything I give I give myself. 
This is salvation's sim¬ 
ple formula. 
And I, who would be saved, would make it mine, to be 
the way I live within a world that needs salvation, and that will be 
saved as I accept Atonement for myself. 


W 297 L 2. 
" Father, how certain are Your ways; how sure their 713 out¬ 
come, and how truly faithfully is every step in my salvation set al¬ 
ready, and accomplished by Your grace. 
Thanks be to You for Your 
eternal gifts, and thanks to You for my Identity." W(547) 


711 Handwritten mark-up suggests (final). 



1575 


11-571 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 298 "I love You, Father, and I love Your Son." 

w 298 L l. 
My gratitude permits my love to be accepted without fear. 

And thus am I restored to my Reality at last. 
All that intruded on 
my holy sight forgiveness takes away. 
And I draw near the end of 
senseless journeys, mad careers, and artificial values. 
I accept in¬ 
stead what God establishes as mine, sure that in that alone I will be 
saved; sure that I go through fear to meet my Love. 


W 298 L 2. 
" Father, I come to You today, because I would not follow 
any way but Yours. 
You are beside me. 
Certain is Your way. 
And I 
am grateful for Your holy gifts of certain sanctuary, and escape from 
everything that woidd obscure my love for God my Father and His holy 
Son." W(548) 


11-572 


1576 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 299 "Eternal holiness abides in me." 

W 299 L 1 . 
My holiness is far beyond my own ability to understand or 
know. 
Yet God my Father, Who created it, acknowledges my holi¬ 
ness as His. 
Our Will, together, understands it. 
And our Will, to¬ 
gether, knows that it is so. 


W 299 L 2. 
" Father, my holiness is not of me. 
It is not mine to be de¬ 
stroyed by sin. 
It is not mine to suffer from attack. 
Illusions can ob¬ 
scure it, but can not put out its radiance nor dim its light. 
It stands 
forever perfect and untouched. 
In it are all things healed, for they re¬ 
main as You created them. 
And I can know my holiness. 
For Holiness 
Itself created me and I can know my Source because it is Your Will that 
You be known." W(549) 


1577 


11-573 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 300 "Only an instant does this world endure." 

w 300 L l. 
This is the 714 thought that 715 can be used to say that death 
and sorrow are the certain lot of all who come here, 716 for their joys 
are gone before they are possessed, or even grasped. 
Yet this is also 
the idea that 717 lets no false perception keep us in its hold, nor repre¬ 
sents more than a passing cloud upon a sky eternally serene. 
And it 
is this serenity we seek, unclouded, obvious and sure, today. 


W 300 L 2. 
"We seek Your holy world today. 
For we, Your loving 
Sons, have lost our way a while. 
But we have listened to Your Voice, 
and learned exactly what to do to be restored to Heaven and our true 
Identity. 
And we give thanks today the world endures but for an in¬ 
stant. 
We woidd go beyond that tiny instant to eternity." W(550) 


714 Handwritten mark-up suggests (a). 


715 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 


716 The original Urtext manuscript has a full sentence break here, with handwriting suggesting only a 
comma instead. 
We accept the handwriting as a correction. 


717 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 



11-574 


1578 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


(9) What is the Second Coming? (W 300 W9) 

w 300 W9 l. 
Christ's Second Coming, which is sure as God, is merely 
the correction of mistakes and the return of sanity. 
It is a part of the 
condition which restores the never-lost, and re-establishes what is 
forever and forever true. 
It is the invitation to God's Word to take 
illusion's place; the willingness to let forgiveness rest upon all things 
without exception and without reserve. 


w 300 W9 2. 
It is the all-inclusive nature of Christ's Second Coming 
that permits it to embrace the world, and hold you safe within its 
gentle advent which encompasses all living things with you. 
There 
is no end to the release the Second Coming brings, as God’s creation 
must be limitless. 
Forgiveness lights the Second Coming's way be¬ 
cause it shines on everyone 718 as one. 
719 

w 300 W9 3. 
The Second Coming ends the lessons which the Holy 
Spirit teaches, making way for the Last Judgment, in which learning 
ends in one last summary that will extend beyond itself, and reach¬ 
ing 720 up to God. 
The Second Coming is the time in which all minds 
are given to the hands of Christ, to be returned to Spirit in the 
Name 721 of true creation and the Will of God. 
722 
w 300 W9 4. 
The Second Coming is the one event in time which time 
itself can not affect. 
For every one who ever came to die, or yet will 
come or who is present now, is equally released from what he made. 

In this equality is Christ restored as one Identity, in Which all 723 Sons 
of God acknowledge that they all are one. 
And God the Father 
smiles upon His Son, His one creation and His only joy. 



718 Handwritten mark-up suggests (everything). 


719 Handwritten mark-up suggests (And thus is oneness recognized at last.) 

720 Urtext manuscript has “reaching” and handwriting suggests (reaches). 
Since the Notes also has 
“reaching” we’re leaving it that way. 
FIP has “reaches.” 

7 "' Handwritten mark-up suggests(name). 


722 Matthew 11:22 “But I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judg¬ 
ment than for you.” 

723 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 



1579 


11-575 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


w 300 W9 5. 
Pray that this 724 Second Coming will be soon, but do not 
rest with that. 
It needs your eyes and ears and hands and feet. 
It 
needs your voice. 
And most of all it needs your willingness. 
Let us 
rejoice that we can do God's Will, and join together in Its holy light. 

Behold, the Son of God is one in us, and we can reach our Father's 
Love through him. 
W(551) 


7 4 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the). 



11-576 


1580 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 301 "And God Himself shall wipe away all tears." 

W 301 L 1. 
"Father, unless I judge I cannot weep. 
Nor can I suffer 
pain, or feel I am abandoned and 725 unneeded in the world. 
This is my 
home, because I judge it not, 726 and therefore is it only what You will. 

Let me today behold it uncondemned, through happy eyes forgiveness 
has released from all distortion. 
Let me see Your world instead of mine. 

And all the tears I shed will be forgotten, for their source is gone. 
Fa¬ 
ther, I will not judge Your world today." 
w 301L 2. 
God's world is happy. 
Those who look on it can only add 
their joy to it, and bless it as a cause of further joy in them. 
We wept 
because we did not understand. 
But we have learned the world we 
saw was false, and we will look upon God's world today. 
W(552) 


725 Handwritten mark-up suggests (or) in place of “and”. 


126 Urtext manuscript has period and new sentence beginning here. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests a 
comma only, which we feel is correct. 



1581 


11-577 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 302 "Where darkness was I look upon the light." 

w 302 L l. 
" Father, our eyes are opening at last. 
Your holy world 
awaits us, as our sight is finally restored and we can see. 
We thought 
we suffered. 
But we had forgot the Son whom You created. 
Now we 
see that darkness is our own imagining, and light is therefor us to look 
upon. 
Christ's vision changes darkness into light, for fear must disap¬ 
pear when love has come. 
Let me forgive Your holy world today that I 
may look upon its holiness, and understand it but reflects my own." 

w 302 L 2. 
Our Love awaits us as we go to Him, and walks beside us, 
showing us the way. 
He fails in nothing. 
He the end we seek, and 
He the means by which we come to Him. 
W(553) 


11-578 


1582 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 303 "The holy Christ is bom in me today." 

w 303 L l. 
Watch with me, angels, watch with me today. 
Let all 
God's holy Thoughts surround me, and be still with me while 
Heaven's Son is born. 
Let earthly sounds be quiet, and the sights to 
which I am accustomed disappear. 
Let Christ be welcomed where 
He is at home, and let Him hear the sounds He understands, and see 
but sights which show His Father's Love. 
Let Him no longer be a 
stranger here, for He is born again in me today . 
727 

w 303 L 2 . 
"Your Son is welcome, Father. 
He has come to save me from 
the evil self I made. 
He is the Self that You have given me. 
He is but 
what I really am in truth. 
He is the Son You love above all things. 
He 
is my Self as You created me. 
It is not Christ that can be crucified. 


Safe in Your arms let me receive Your Son." W(554) 


727 John 3:3 Jesus answered and said to him, “Most assuredly, I say to you, unless one is bom again, he 
cannot see the kingdom of God.” 

John 3:7 “Do not marvel that I said to you, ‘You must be bom again.’ 


1583 


11-579 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 304 "Let not my world obscure the sight of Christ." 

W 304 L 1. 
I can obscure my holy sight, if I intrude my world upon it. 

Nor can I behold the holy sights Christ looks upon unless it is His 
vision that I use. 
Perception is a mirror, not a fact. 
And what I look 
on is my state of mind reflected outward. 
I would bless the world 
by looking on it through the eyes of Christ. 
And I will look upon 
the certain signs that all my sins have been forgiven me. 


w 304 L 2 . 
"You lead me from the darkness to the light; from sin to ho¬ 
liness. 
Let me forgive, and thus receive salvation for the world. 
It is 
Your gift, my Father, given me to offer to Your holy Son, that he may 

find again the memory of You, and of Your Son as You created him." 

W(555) 


11-580 


1584 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 305 "There is a peace that Christ bestows on us." 

w 305 L l. 
Who uses but Christ's vision finds a peace so deep and 
quiet, undisturbable and wholly changeless, that the world contains 
no counterpart. 
Comparisons are still before this peace. 
And all the 
world departs in silence, as this peace envelops it, and gently carries 
it to truth, no more to be the home of fear. 
For Love has come, and 
healed the world by giving it Christ's peace. 


w 305 L 2 . 
" Father, the peace of Christ is given us, because it is Your 
Will that we be saved. 
Help us today but to accept Your gift, and judge 
it not. 
For it has come to us to save us from our judgment on our¬ 
selves. 
" W(556) 


1585 


11-581 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 306 "The gift of Christ is all I seek today." 

W 306 L 1 . 
What but Christ's vision would I use today, when it can 
offer me a day in which I see a world so like to Heaven that an an¬ 
cient memory returns to me? Today I can forget the world I made. 

Today I can go past all fear, and be restored to love and holiness and 
peace. 
Today I am redeemed, and born anew into a world of mercy 
and of care; of loving kindness and the peace of God. 


w 306 L 2 . 
"And so, our Father, we return to You, remembering we 
never went away; remembering Your holy gifts to us. 
In gratitude and 
thankfidness we come, with empty hands and open hearts and minds, 
asking but what You give. 
We cannot make an offering sufficient for 
Your Son. 
But in Your Love the gift of Christ is his." W(557) 


11-582 


1586 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 307 "Conflicting wishes cannot be my will." 

w 307 L l. 
" Father, Your Will is mine, and only That. 
There is no 
other will for me to have. 
Let me not try to make another will, for it is 
senseless and will cause me pain. 
Your Will alone can bring me happi¬ 
ness, and only Yours exists. 
If I would have what only You can give. 
I 
must accept Your will for me, and enter into peace where conflict is 
impossible, Your Son is one with You in being and in will, and nothing 
contradicts the holy truth that I remain as You created me." 
w 307 L 2. 
And with this prayer, we enter silently into a state where 
conflict cannot come, because we join our holy will with God's in 
recognition that they are but one . 
728 W(558) 


s Handwritten mark-up suggests(the same) in place of “but one”. 
In the Notes we find “the same” 
written between the lines above “but one.” 


1587 


11-583 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 308 "This instant is the only time there is." 

w 308 L l. 
I have conceived of time in such a way that I defeat my 
aim. 
If I elect to reach past time to timelessness, I must change my 
perception of what time is for. 
Time's purpose cannot be to keep the 
past and future one. 
The only interval in which I can be saved from 
time is now. 
For in this instant has forgiveness come to set me free. 

The birth of Christ is now, without a past or future. 
He has come to 
give His present blessing to the world, restoring it to timelessness 
and love. 
And love is ever present, here and now. 


W 308 L 2. 
"Thanks for this instant, Father. 
It is now I am redeemed. 

This instant is the time You have appointed for Your Son's release, and 
for salvation of the world in him." W(559) 


11-584 


1588 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 309 "I will not fear to look within today." 

w 309 L l. 
Within me is Eternal Innocence, because it is God's Will 
that It be there forever and forever. 
I, His Son, whose will is limit¬ 
less as is His own, can will no change in this. 
For to deny my Fa¬ 
ther's Will is to deny my own. 
To look within is but to find my will 
as God created it, and as it is. 
I fear to look within because I think I 
made another will which is not true, and made it real. 
Yet it has no 
effects. 
Within me is the holiness of God. 
Within me is the memory 
of Him. 


w 309 L 2 . 
"The step I take today, my Father, is my sure release from 
idle dreams of sin. 
Your altar stands serene and undefiled. 
It is the 
holy altar to my Self, and there I find my true Identity." W(560) 


1589 


11-585 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 310 "In fearlessness and love I spend today." 

w 310 L l. 
"This day, my Father, would I spend with You, as You have 
chosen all my days should be. 
And what I will experience is not of time 
at all. 
The joy that comes to me is not of days nor hours, for it comes 
from Heaven to Your Son. 
This day will be your sweet reminder to 
remember You, Your gracious calling to Your holy Son, the sign Your 
grace has come to me, and that it is Your Will that I be free today." 

W 310 L 2. 
We spend this day together, you and I, and all the world 
joins with us in our song of thankfulness and joy to Him Who gave 
salvation to us, and Who set us free. 
We are restored to peace and 
holiness. 
There is no room in us for fear today, for we have wel¬ 
comed love into our hearts. 
W(561) 


11-586 


1590 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


(10) What is the Last Judgment? (W 310 W10) 
w 310 wio l. 
Christ's Second Coming gives the Son of God the gift to 
hear the Voice for God proclaim that what is false is false, and what 
is true has never changed. 
729 And this the judgment is in which per¬ 
ception ends. 
At first you see a world which has accepted this as 
true, projected from a now corrected mind. 
730 And with this holy 
sight, perception gives a silent blessing and then disappears, its goal 
accomplished and its mission done. 
731 

W 310 W10 2. 
The final judgment 732 on the world contains no condem¬ 
nation. 
For it sees the world as totally forgiven, without sin, and 
wholly purposeless. 
Without a cause, and now without a function 
in Christ's sight, it merely slips away to nothingness. 
There it was 
born, and there it ends as well. 
And all the figures in the dream in 
which the world began go with it. 
Bodies now are useless, and will 
therefore fade away, because the Son of God is limitless, 
w 310 wio 3. 
You who believed that Gods Last Judgment would con¬ 
demn the world to hell along with you, accept this holy truth: God's 
Judgment is the gift of the Correction He bestowed on all your er¬ 
rors, freeing you from them, and all effects they ever seemed to 
have. 
To fear God's saving grace is but to fear complete release 


729 Matthew 16:27 For the Son of Man will come in the glory of His Father with His angels, and then 
He will reward each according to his works. 


730 2 Peter 3:13 But according to His promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth in which 
righteousness dwells. 


Romans 8:15-23 For ye received not the spirit of bondage again unto fear; but ye received the spirit of 
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. 
The Spirit himself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are 
children of God: and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we 
suffer with him , that we may be also glorified with him. 
For I reckon that the sufferings of this present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed to us-ward. 
For the earnest 
expectation of the creation waiteth for the revealing of the sons of God. 
For the creation was subjected 
to vanity, not of its own will, but by reason of him who subjected it, in hope that the creation itself also 
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. 

For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. 
And not only 
so, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, 
waiting for our adoption, to wit , the redemption of our body. 


731 Revelation 21:1 And I saw a new heaven and a new earth. 
For the first heaven and the first earth 
had passed away. 
And the sea no longer is. 


732 Handwritten mark-up suggests (Final Judgment). 



1591 


11-587 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


from suffering, return to peace, security and happiness, and union 
with your own Identity. 


w 310 wio 4. 
God's Final Judgment is as merciful as every step in His 
appointed plan to bless His Son, and call Him to return to the eter¬ 
nal peace He shares with him. 
Be not afraid of Love. 
For It alone 
can heal all sorrow, wipe away all tears, and gently waken from his 
dreams of pain the Son whom God acknowledges as His. 
Be not 
afraid of this. 
Salvation asks you give it welcome. 
And the world 
awaits your glad acceptance, which will set it free, 
w 310 wio 5. 
This is God's Final Judgment: "You are still My holy 
Son, forever innocent, forever loving and forever loved, as limitless 
as Your Creator, and completely changeless and forever pure. 

Therefore awaken and return to Me. 
I am Your Father and you are 
My Son." W(562) 


11-588 


1592 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 311 "I judge all things as I would have them be." 

w 3ll L l. 
Judgment was made to be a weapon used against the 
truth. 
It separates what it is being used against, and sets it off as if it 
were a thing apart. 
And then it makes of it what you 733 would have 
it be. 
It judges what it cannot understand, because it cannot see to¬ 
tality and therefore judges falsely. 
Let us not use it today, but make 
a gift of it to Him Who has a different use for it. 
He will relieve 
you 734 of the agony of all the judgments you 735 have made against 
yourself, 736 and re-establish peace of mind by giving you 737 God's 
Judgment of His Son. 


W 311 L 2. 
" Father , we wait with open mind today, to hear Your Judg¬ 
ment of the Son You love. 
We do not know him, and we cannot judge. 

And so we let Your Love decide what he whom You created as Your 
Son must be." W(563) 


733 Handwritten mark-up suggests (we). 


734 Handwritten mark-up suggests (us). 


733 Handwritten mark-up suggests (we). 


736 Handwritten mark-up suggests(ourselves). 


737 Handwritten mark-up suggests (us). 



1593 


11-589 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 312 "I see all things as I would have them be." 

W312L1. 
Perception follows judgment. 
Having judged, you 738 
therefore see what you would look upon. 
For vision merely serves 
to offer you what you would have. 
It is impossible to overlook what 
you would see, and fail to see what you have chosen to behold. 


How surely, therefore, must the real world come to greet the holy 
sight of anyone who takes the Holy Spirit's purpose as his goal for 
seeing. 
And he cannot fail to look upon what Christ would have 
him see, and share Christ's love for what he looks upon. 


W 312 L 2. 
"I have no purpose for today except to look upon a liberated 
world, set free from all the judgments I have made. 
Father, this is Your 
Will for me today, and therefore it must be my goal as well." W(564) 


718 Handwritten mark-up suggests this whole paragraph be shifted from the second person plural (you) 
to the first person plural (we). 



11-590 


1594 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 313 "Now let a new perception come to me." 

W 313 L 1. 
" Father, there is a vision which beholds all things as 
sinless, so that fear has gone, and where it was is Love invited in. 
And 
Love will come wherever it is asked. 
This vision is Your gift. 
The eyes 
of Christ look on a world forgiven. 
In His sight are all its sins for¬ 
given, for He sees no sin in anything He looks upon. 
Now let His true 
perception come to me, that I may waken from the dream of guilt and 
look within upon my sinlessness, which You have kept completely un¬ 
defiled upon the altar to Your holy Son, the Self with Winch I would 
identify." 

w 313 L 2. 
Let us today behold each other in the sight of Christ. 
How 
beautiful we are! How holy and how loving! Brother, come and 
join with me today. 
We save the world when we are 739 joined. 
For 
in our vision it becomes as holy as the Light in us. 
W(565) 


739 Handwritten mark-up suggests (have) in place of “are”. 



1595 


11-591 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 314 "I seek a future different from the past." 

w 314 L l. 
From new perception of the world there comes a future 
very different from the past. 
The future now is recognized as but 
extensions 740 of the present. 
Past mistakes can cast no shadows on it, 
so that fear has lost its idols and its images, and being formless, it 
has no effects. 
Death will not claim the future now, for life is now 
its goal, and all the needed means are happily provided. 
Who can 
grieve or suffer, when the present has been freed, extending its se¬ 
curity and peace into a quiet future filled with hope? 

W 314 L 2. 
" Father , we were mistaken in the past, and choose to use 
the present to he free. 
Now do we leave the future in Your hands, leav¬ 
ing behind our past mistakes, and sure that You will keep Your present 
Promises, and guide the future in their holy light." W (566) 


740 Handwritten mark-up suggests (extension). 



11-592 


1596 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 315 "All gifts my brothers give belong to me." 

w 315 L l. 
Each day a thousand treasures come to me with every 
passing moment. 
I am blessed with gifts throughout the day, in 
value far beyond all things of which I can conceive. 
A brother 
smiles upon another, and my heart is gladdened. 
Someone speaks a 
word of gratitude or mercy, and my mind perceives 741 this gift and 
takes it as its own. 
And everyone who finds the way to God be¬ 
comes my Savior, pointing out the way to me, and giving me his 
certainty that what he learned is surely mine as well. 


w 315 L 2 . 
"I thank Yon, Father, for the many gifts that come to me to¬ 
day and every day from every Son of God. 
My brothers are unlimited 
in all their gifts to me. 
Now may I offer them my thankfulness, that 

gratitude to them may lead me on to my Creator and His memory." 

W(567) 


741 The Urtext manuscript has “perceives” here and so does the Notes. 
The handwritten mark-up sug¬ 
gests (receives). 



1597 

PROOF COPY 


11-593 



Part 2 


Lesson 316 "All gifts I give my brothers are my own." 

W 316 L 1 . 
As every gift my brothers give is mine, so every gift I give 
belongs to me. 
Each one allows a past mistake to go, and leave no 
shadow on the holy mind my Father loves. 
His grace is given me in 
every gift a brother has received throughout all time, and past all 
time as well. 
My treasure-house is full, and angels watch its open 
doors, that not one gift is lost and only more are added. 
Let me 
come to where my treasures are, and enter in where I am truly wel¬ 
come and at home among the gifts that God has given me. 


w 316 L 2. 
" Father, I would accept Your gifts today. 
I do not recognize 
them. 
Yet I trust that You Who gave them will provide the means by 
which I can behold them, see their worth, and cherish only them as 
what I want." W(568) 


11-594 


1598 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 317 "I follow in the way appointed me." 

w 317 L l. 
I have a special place to fill; a role for me alone. 
Salvation 
waits until I take this part as what I choose to do. 
Until I make this 
choice, I am the slave of time and human destiny. 
But when I will¬ 
ingly and gladly go the way my Father's plan appointed me to go, 
then will I recognize salvation is already here, already given all my 
brothers and already mine as well. 


w 317 L 2. 
" Father, Your way is what I choose today. 
Where it would 
lead me do I choose to go; what it umdd have me do I choose to do. 

Your way is certain, and the end secure. 
The memory of You awaits 
me there, and all my sorrows end in Your embrace, which You have 
promised to Your Son, who thought mistakenly that he had wandered 
from the sure protection of Your loving arms." W(569) 


1599 


11-595 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 318 "In me salvation's means and end are one." 

w 318 L l. 
In me, God's holy Son, are reconciled all parts of Heaven's 
plan to save the world. 
What could conflict, when all the parts have 
but one purpose and one aim? How could there be a single part that 
stands aside, or one of more or less importance than the rest? I am 
the means by which God's Son is saved, because salvation's purpose 
is to find the sinlessness which God has placed in me. 
I was created 
as the thing I seek. 
I am the goal the world is searching for. 
I am 
God's Son, His one Eternal Love. 
I am salvation's means and end as 
well. 


w 318 L 2 . 
"Let me today, my Father, take the role You offer me in Your 
request that I accept Atonement for myself. 
For thus does what is 
thereby reconciled in me become as surely reconciled to You." W(570) 


11-596 


1600 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 319 "I came for the salvation of the world." 

W 319 L 1 . 
Here is a thought from which all arrogance has been re¬ 
moved, and only truth is left. 
For arrogance opposes truth. 
But 
where 742 there is no arrogance, the truth will come immediately, and 
fill up the space the ego left unoccupied by lies. 
Only the ego can be 
limited, and therefore it must seek for aims which are curtailed and 
limiting. 
The ego thinks that what one gains totality must lose. 
And 
yet it is the Will of God I learn that what one gains is given unto all. 


W 319 L 2. 
" Father , Your Will is total, and the goal that 743 stems from 
It shares Its totality. 
What aim but the salvation of the world coidd 
You have given me? And what but this could be the Will my Self has 
shared with You?" W(57l) 


741 Handwritten mark-up suggests (when) instead of “where”. 

741 Handwritten mark-up suggests (which). 



1601 


11-597 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 320 "My Father gives all power unto me." 

W 320 L 1 . 
The Son of God is limitless. 
There are no limits on his 
strength, his peace, his joy, nor 744 any attributes his Father gave in 
his creation. 
What he wills with his Creator and Redeemer must be 
done. 
His holy will can never be denied, because his Father shines 
upon his mind, and lays before it all the strength and love in earth 
and Heaven . 
745 I am he to whom all this is given. 
I am he in whom 
the power of my Father's Will abides. 


W 320 L 2. 
"Your Will can do all things in me, and then extend to all 
the world as well through me. 
There is no limit on Your will. 
And so 
all power has been given to Your Son." W(572) 


744 Handwritten mark-up suggests (nor) instead of the originally typed “or”. 
This is probably correct. 

743 Acts 22:6 And it came to pass, that, as I made my journey, and drew nigh unto Damascus, about 
noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me. 



11-598 


1602 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


(11) What is Creation? (W320 Wll) 

w 320 Wll l. 
Creation is the sum of all God's Thoughts, in number 
infinite, and everywhere without all limit. 
Only Love creates, and 
only like Itself. 
There was no time when all that It created was not 
there. 
Nor will there be a time when anything that It created suffers 
any pain . 
746 Forever and forever are God's Thoughts exactly as 
They 747 were and as They 748 are, unchanged through time and after 
time is done. 


W 320 Wll 2. 
God’s Thoughts are given all the power that Their own 
Creator has. 
For Fie would add to Love by Its extension. 
Thus Flis 
Son shares in creation, and must therefore share in power to create. 

What God has willed to be forever one will still be one when time is 
over; and will not be changed throughout the course of time, re¬ 
maining as it was before the thought of time began. 


w 320 Wll 3. 
Creation is the opposite of all illusions, for Creation 749 is 
the truth. 
Creation is the holy Son of God, for in Creation 750 is His 
Will complete in every aspect, making every part container of the 
whole. 
Its oneness is forever guaranteed inviolate; forever held 
within His holy Will, beyond all possibility of harm, of separation, 
imperfection and of any spot upon its sinlessness. 


w 320 Wll 4. 
We are Creation ; 751 we the Sons of God. 
We seem to be 
discrete and unaware of our eternal unity with Flim. 
Yet back of all 
our doubts, past all our fears, there still is certainty. 
For Love re¬ 
mains with all Its Thought, Its sureness being Theirs. 
God's mem¬ 
ory is in our holy minds, which know their oneness and their unity 
with their Creator. 
Let our function be only to let this memory re- 


746 Handwritten mark-up suggests (loss) instead of “pain”. 


747 Handwritten mark-up suggests (they). 


74s Handwritten mark-up suggests (they). 


744 Handwritten mark-up suggests (creation). 


750 Handwritten mark-up suggests (creation). 


751 In the Urtext manuscript this word is not capitalized, but we feel that it should be, consistent with the 
previous paragraph, and the fact that it is a proper noun in this usage. 



1603 


11-599 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


turn, only to let God's Will be done on earth , 752 only to be restored to 
sanity, and to be but as God created us. 


w 320 Wll 5. 
Our Father calls to us. 
We hear His Voice, and we for¬ 
give creation in the Name of its Creator, Holiness Itself, Whose holi¬ 
ness His own creation shares; Whose holiness is still a part of us. 



W(573) 


752 


Matthew 6:10 “Your kingdom come. 
Your will be done On earth as it is in heaven.” 


11-600 


1604 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 321 "Father, my freedom is in You alone." 

w 321 L l. 
"I did not understand what made me free, nor what my free¬ 
dom is, nor where to look to find it. 
Father, I have searched in vain un¬ 
til I heard Your Voice directing me. 
Now I would guide myself no 
more. 
For I have neither made nor understood the way to find my free¬ 
dom. 
But I trust in You. 
You Who endowed me with my freedom as 
Your holy Son will not he lost to me. 
Your Voice directs me. 
And the 
way to You is opening and clear to me at last. 
Father, my freedom is in 
You alone. 
Father, it is my will that I return." 
w 321L 2. 
Today we answer for the world, which will be freed along 
with us. 
How glad are we to find our freedom through the certain 
way our Father has established. 
And how sure is all the world's sal¬ 
vation, when we learn our freedom can be found in God alone. 

W(574) 


1605 


11-601 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 322 "I can give up but what was never real." 

W 322 L 1. 
I sacrifice illusions; nothing more. 
And as illusions go I 
find the gifts illusions tried to hide, awaiting me in shining wel¬ 
come, and in readiness to give God's ancient messages to me. 
His 
memory abides in every gift that I receive of Him. 
And every dream 
serves only to conceal the Self Which is God's only Son, the likeness 
of Himself, the Holy One Who still abides in Him forever, as He still 
abides in me . 
753 

W 322 L 2. 
" Father, to You all sacrifice remains forever inconceivable. 

And so I cannot sacrifice except in dreams. 
As You created me, I can 
give up nothing You gave me. 
What You did not give has no reality. 

What loss can I anticipate except the loss of fear, and the return of Love 
into my mind?" W(575) 


753 Genesis 1:26-27 Then God said, “Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let 
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the 
earth and over every creeping thing that creeps on the earth.” So God created man in His own image; in 
the image of God He created him; male and female He created them. 


Psalm 16:10 For You will not leave my soul in Sheol, Nor will You allow Your Holy One to see cor¬ 
ruption. 


Mark 1:24 Saying, “Let us alone! What have we to do with You, Jesus of Nazareth? Did You come to 
destroy us? I know who You are—the Holy One of God!” 


11-602 


1606 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 323 "I gladly make the 'sacrifice' of fear." 

W 323 L 1. 
"Here is the only 'sacrifice' Yon ask of Your beloved Son; 
You ask him to give up all suffering, all sense of loss and sadness, all 
anxiety and doubt, and freely let Your Love come streaming in to his 
awareness, healing him of pain, and giving him Your own eternal 
joy. 
754 Such is the 'sacrifice' You ask of me, and one I gladly make; the 
only 'cost' of restoration of Your memory to me, for the salvation of the 
world." 

w 323 L 2. 
And as we pay the debt we owe to truth - a debt which 
merely is the letting go of self-deceptions and of images we wor¬ 
shipped falsely - truth returns to us in wholeness and in joy. 
We are 
deceived no longer. 
Love has now returned to our awareness. 
And 
we are at peace again, for fear has gone, and only Love remains. 

W(576) 


754 Isaiah 60:15 Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man passed through thee, I will 
make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. 


Matthew 3:17 And suddenly a voice came from heaven, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I 
am well pleased.” 


1607 


11-603 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 324 "I merely follow, for I would not lead." 

W 324 L 1 . 
" Father, You are the One Who gave the plan for my salva¬ 
tion to me. 
You have set the way I am to go, the role to take, and every 
step in my appointed path. 
I cannot lose the way. 
I can but choose to 
wander off a while, and then return. 
Your loving Voice will always 
call me back, and guide my feet aright. 
My brothers all can follow in 
the way I lead them. 
Yet I merely follow in the way to You, as You di¬ 
rect me and woidd have me go." 

w 324 L 2. 
So let us follow One Who knows the way. 
We need not 
tarry, and we cannot stray except an instant from His loving hand. 

We walk together, for we follow Him. 
And it is He Who makes the 
ending sure, and guarantees a safe returning home. 
W(577) 


11-604 


1608 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 325 "All things I think I see reflect ideas." 

w 325 L l. 
This is salvation's keynote. 
What I see reflects a process in 
my mind, which starts with my idea of what I want. 
From there, the 
mind makes up an image of the thing the mind desires, judges valu¬ 
able, and therefore seeks to find. 
These images are then projected 
outward, looked upon, esteemed as real, and guarded as one's own. 

From insane wishes comes an insane world. 
From judgment comes 
a world condemned. 
And from forgiving thoughts a gentle world 
comes forth, with mercy for the holy Son of God, to offer him a 
kindly home where he can rest a while before he journeys on, and 
help his brothers walk ahead with him and find the way to Fieaven 
and to God. 


w 325 L 2 . 
"Our Father, Your Ideas reflect the truth, and mine apart 
from Yours hut makes up dreams. 
Let me behold what only Yours re¬ 
flect, for Yours and Yours alone establish truth." W(578) 


1609 


11-605 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 326 "I am forever an Effect of God." 

w 326 L l. 
" Father, I was created in Your Mind, a holy Thought that 
never left its home. 
I am forever Your Effect, and You forever and for¬ 
ever are my Cause. 
As You created me I have remained. 
Where You 
established me I still abide, 755 and all Your attributes abide in me be¬ 
cause it is Your Will to have a Son so like his Cause that Cause and Its 
Effect are indistinguishable. 
Eet me know that I am an Effect of God, 
and so I have the power to create like You. 
And as it is in Heaven, so 
on earth. 
756 Your plan I follow here, and at the end I know that You 
will gather Your Effects into the tranquil Heaven of Your Eove, where 
earth will disappear, and separate things unite in glory as the Son of 


God. 



W 326 L 2. 
Let us today behold earth disappear, at first transformed, 
and then, forgiven, fade entirely into God's holy Will. 
W(579) 


755 Handwritten mark-up suggests a period here, beginning a new sentence with “And all .. 


756 Matthew 6:10 “Your kingdom come. 
Your will be done On earth as it is in heaven." 


11-606 


1610 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 327 "I need but call and You will answer me." 

w 327 L l. 
I am not asked to take salvation on the basis of an unsup¬ 
ported faith. 
For God has promised He will hear my call, and an¬ 
swer me Himself. 
Let me but learn from my experience that this is 
true, and faith in Him must surely come to me. 
This is the faith that 
will endure, and take me farther and still farther on the road that 
leads to Him. 
For thus I will be sure that He has not abandoned me, 
and loves me still, awaiting but my call to give me all the help I need 
to come to Him. 


W 327 L 2. 
" Father, I thank You that Your promises will never fail in 
my experience, if I but test them out. 
Let me attempt therefore to try 
them, and to judge them not. 
Your Word is one with You. 
You give 
the means whereby conviction comes, and surety of Your abiding Love 
is gained at last." W(580) 


1611 


11-607 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 328 "I choose the second place to gain the first." 

w 328 L l. 
What seems to be the second place is first, for all things we 
perceive are upside-down until we listen to the Voice of God. 
It 
seems that we will gain autonomy but by our striving to be separate, 
and that our independence from the rest of God's creation is the way 
in which salvation is obtained. 
Yet all we find is sickness, suffering, 
and loss and death. 
This is not what our Father wills for us, nor is 
there any second to His Will. 
To join with His is but to find our 
own. 
And since our will is His, it is to Him that we must go to rec¬ 
ognize our will. 


W 328 L 2. 
"There is no will but Yours. 
And I am glad that nothing I 
imagine contradicts what Yon would have me do. 
757 It is Your Will 
that I be wholly safe, eternally at peace. 
And happily I share that Will 
which You, my Father, gave as part of me." W(58i) 


7,7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (be) instead of “do”. 



11-608 


1612 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 329 "I have already chosen what You will." 

W 329 L 1 . 
"Father,I 758 wandered from Your Will, defied It, broke Its 
laws, and interposed a second will more powerfid than Yours. 
Yet 
what I am in truth is but Your Will, extended and extending. 
This am 
I. 
And This will never change. 
As You are One, so am I one with You. 

And This I chose in my creation, where my will became forever one 
with Yours. 
That choice was made for all eternity. 
It cannot change, 
and be in opposition to Itself. 
Father, my will is Yours. 
And I am safe, 
untroubled and serene, in endless joy, because it is Your Will that it be 
so." 

W 329 L 2. 
Today we will accept our union with each other and our 
Source. 
We have no will apart from His, and all of us are one be¬ 
cause His Will is shared by all of us. 
Through It we recognize that 
we are one. 
Through It we find our way at last to God. 
W(582) 


758 Handwritten mark-up suggests (thought I). 



1613 


11-609 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 330 "I will not hurt myself again today." 

w 330 L l. 
Let us this day accept forgiveness as our only function. 

Why should we attack our minds, and give them images of pain? 
Why should we teach them they are powerless, when God holds out 
His power and His Love, and bids them take what is already theirs? 
The mind that is made willing to accept God's gifts has been re¬ 
stored to Spirit, and extends its freedom and its joy, as is the Will of 
God united with its own. 
The Self Which God created cannot sin, 
and therefore cannot suffer. 
Let us choose today that He be our 
Identity, and thus escape forever from all things the dream of fear 
appears to offer us. 


W 33o L 2 . 
" Father, Your Son can not be hurt. 
And if we think we 
suffer, we but fail to know our one Identity we share with You. 
We 
would return to It today, to be made free forever from all our mistakes, 
and to be saved from what we thought we were." W(583) 


11-610 


1614 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


(12) What is the Ego? (W330 W12) 

W 330 W12 l. 
The ego is idolatry; the sign of limited and separated 
self, born in a body, doomed to suffer and to end its life in death. 
It 
is the will that sees the Will of God as enemy, and takes a form in 
which It is denied. 
The ego is the "proof" that strength is weak and 
love is fearful, life is really death, and what opposes God alone is 
true. 


w 330 W12 2. 
The ego is insane. 
In fear it stands beyond the Every¬ 
where, apart from All, in separation from the Infinite. 
In its insanity 
it thinks it has become a victor over God Himself, and in its terrible 
autonomy it "sees" the Will of God has been destroyed. 
It dreams 
of punishment, and trembles at the figures in its dreams, its enemies 
who seek to murder it before it can ensure its safety by attacking 
them. 


w 330 W12 3. 
The Son of God is egoless. 
What can he know of mad¬ 
ness and the death of God, when he abides in Him? What can he 
know of sorrow and of suffering, when he lives in eternal joy? What 
can he know of fear and punishment, of sin and guilt, of hatred and 
attack, when all there is surrounding him is everlasting peace, for¬ 
ever conflict-free and undisturbed, in deepest silence and tranquil¬ 
ity? 

w 330 W12 4. 
To know Reality is not to know the ego and its 
thoughts, its works, its acts, its laws and its beliefs, its dreams, its 
hopes, its plans for its salvation, and the cost belief in it entails. 
In 
suffering, the price for faith in it is so immense that crucifixion of the 
Son of God is offered daily at its darkened shrine, and blood must 
flow before the altar where its sickly followers prepare its feast of 


death . 
759 


W 330 W12 5. 
Yet will one lily of forgiveness change the darkness into 
light; the altar to illusions to the shrine of Life Itself. 
And peace will 
be restored forever to the holy minds which God created as His Son, 


759 The words “its feast of’ are crossed out and overtyped with “for”. 



1615 


11-611 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


His dwelling-place. 
His joy. 
His love, completely His, completely 
one with Him. 
W(584) 


1616 


11-612 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 331 "There is no conflict, for my will is Yours." 

W 331 L 1. 
"How foolish, Father, to believe Your Son could cause him¬ 
self to suffer! Could he make a plan for his damnation, and be left 
without a certain way to his release? You love me, Father. 
You coidd 
never leave me desolate, to die within a world of pain and cruelty. 


How coidd I think that Love has left Itself? There is no will except the 
Will of Love. 
Fear is a dream, and has no will that can conflict with 
Yours. 
Conflict is sleep, and peace awakening. 
Death is illusion; life, 
Eternal Truth. 
There is no opposition to Your Will. 
There is no con¬ 
flict, for my will is Yours." 

w 331L 2. 
Forgiveness shows us that God's Will is one, and that we 
share It. 
Let us look upon the holy sights forgiveness shows today, 
that we may find the peace of God. 
Amen. 
W(585) 


1617 


11-613 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 332 "Fear binds the world. 
Forgiveness sets it free." 

w 332 L l. 
The ego makes illusions. 
Truth undoes its evil dreams by 
shining them away. 
Truth never makes attack. 
It merely is. 
And by 
its Presence is the mind recalled from fantasies, awaking to the Real. 

Forgiveness bids this Presence enter in, and take its rightful place 
within the mind. 
Without forgiveness is the mind in chains, believ¬ 
ing in its own futility. 
Yet with forgiveness does the light shine 
through the dream of darkness, offering it hope, and giving it the 
means to realize the freedom that is its inheritance. 


W 332 L 2. 
"We would not bind the world again today. 
760 Fear holds it 
prisoner. 
And yet Your Love has given us the means to set it free. 
Fa¬ 
ther, we would release it now. 
For as we offer freedom it is given us. 

And we woidd not remain as prisoners, while You hold out our 761 free¬ 
dom Unto 762 US." W(586) 


71,0 Matthew 16:19 “And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on 
earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.” 

761 Handwritten mark-up suggests (are holding). 


762 Handwritten mark-up suggests (out to). 



11-614 


1618 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 333 "Forgiveness ends the dream of conflict here." 

w 333 L l. 
Conflict must be resolved. 
It cannot be evaded, set aside, 
denied, disguised, seen somewhere else, called by another name, 
nor hidden by deceit of any kind, if it would be escaped. 
It must be 
seen exactly as it is, where it is thought to be, in the reality which 
has been given it, and with the purpose that the mind accorded it. 

For only then are its defenses lifted, and the truth can shine upon it 
as it disappears. 


W 333 L 2. 
"Father, forgiveness is the light Yon chose to shine away 
all conflict and all doubt, and light the way for our return to You. 
No 
light but this can end our evil dreams. 
No light but this can save the 
world. 
For this alone will never fail in anything, being Your gift to 
Your beloved Son." W(587) 


1619 


11-615 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 334 "Today I claim the gifts forgiveness gives." 

W 334 L 1. 
I will not wait another day to find the treasures which my 
Father offers me . 
763 Illusions must be 764 vain, and dreams are gone 
even while they are woven out of thoughts that rest on false percep¬ 
tion. 
Let me not accept such meager gifts again today. 
God's Voice 
is offering the peace of God to all who hear and choose to follow 
Him. 
This is my choice today. 
And so I go to find the treasures God 
has given me. 


W 334 L 2. 
"I seek but the eternal. 
For Your Son can be content with 
nothing less than this. 
What, then, can be his solace but what You are 
offering to his bewildered mind and frightened heart, to give him cer¬ 
tainty and bring him peace? Today I would behold my brother sinless. 

This Your Will for me, for thus 765 will I behold my sinlessness." W(588) 


763 Matthew 13:44 “The kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden in the field; which a man 
found, and hid; and in his joy he goeth and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.” 

764 Handwritten mark-up suggests (all are). 


765 Handwritten mark-up suggests (so) instead of “thus”. 



11-616 


1620 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 335 "I choose to see my brother's sinlessness." 

w 335 L l. 
Forgiveness is a choice. 
I never see my brother as he is, for 
that is far beyond perception. 
What I see in him is merely what I 
wish to see, because it stands for what I want to be the truth. 
It is to 
this alone that I respond, however much I seem to be impelled by 
outside happenings. 
I choose to see what I would look upon, and 
this I see, and only this. 
My brother's sinlessness shows me that I 
would look upon my own. 
And I will see it, having chosen to be¬ 
hold my brother in its holy light. 


W 335 L 2. 
"What could restore Your memory to me except to see my 
brother’s sinlessness? His holiness reminds me that he was created one 
with me and like myself. 
In him I find my Self and in Your Son I find 
the memory of You as well. 
” W(589) 


1621 


11-617 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 336 "Forgiveness lets me know that minds are 
joined." 

W 336 L 1 . 
Forgiveness is the means appointed for perception's end¬ 
ing. 
Knowledge is restored after perception first is changed, and 
then gives way entirely to what remains forever past its highest 
reach. 
For sights and sounds, at best, can serve but to recall the 
memory that lies beyond them all. 
Forgiveness sweeps away distor¬ 
tions, and opens the hidden altar to the truth. 
Its lilies shine into the 
mind, and call it to return and look within, to find what it has vainly 
sought without. 
For here, and only here, is peace of mind restored, 
for this the dwelling-place of God Himself. 


w 336 L 2 . 
"In quiet may forgiveness wipe away my dreams of separa¬ 
tion and of sin. 
Then let me, Father, look within and find Your prom¬ 
ise of my sinlessness is kept; Your Word remains unchanged within my 
mind, Your Love is still abiding in my heart." W(590) 


11-618 


1622 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 337 "My sinlessness protects me from all harm." 

w 337 L l. 
My sinlessness ensures me perfect peace, eternal safety, 
everlasting love, freedom forever from all thought of loss; complete 
deliverance from suffering. 
And only happiness can be my state, for 
only happiness is given me. 
What must I do to know all this is 
mine? I must accept Atonement for myself, and nothing more. 
God 
has already done all things that need be done. 
And I must learn I 
need do nothing of myself, for I need but accept my Self, my 
sinlessness, created for me, now already mine, to feel God's Love 
protecting me from harm, to understand my Father loves His Son; to 
know I am the Son my Father loves. 


W 337 L 2. 
"You who created me in sinlessness are not mistaken about 

what I am. 
I was mistaken when I thought I sinned, but I accept 

Atonement for myself. 
Father, my dream is ended now. 
Amen." 

W(591) 


1623 


11-619 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 338 "I am affected only by my thoughts." 

w 338 L l. 
It needs but this to let salvation come to all the world. 
For 
in this single thought is everyone released at last from fear. 
Now he 
has learned that no-one frightens him, and nothing can endanger 
him. 
He has no enemies, and he is safe from all external things. 
His 
thoughts can frighten him, but since these thoughts belong to him 
alone, he has the power to change them, and exchange each fear 
thought for a happy thought of love. 
He crucified himself. 
Yet God 
has planned that His beloved Son will be redeemed. 


w 338 L 2. 
"Your plan is sure, my Father, - only Yours. 
All other plans 
will fail. 
And I will have thoughts that will frighten me until I learn 
that You have given me the only Thought Which leads me to salvation. 

Mine alone will fail and lead me nowhere. 
But the Thought You gave 
me promises to lead me home, because it holds Your promise to Your 
Son." W(592) 


11-620 


1624 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 339 "I will receive whatever I request." 

w 339 L l. 
No-one desires pain. 
But he can think that pain is pleas¬ 
ure. 
No-one would avoid his happiness. 
But he can think that joy is 
painful, threatening and dangerous. 
Everyone will receive what he 
requests. 
But he can be confused indeed about the things he wants; 
the state he would attain. 
What can he then request that he would 
want when he receives it? He has asked for what will frighten him, 
and bring him suffering. 
Let us resolve today to ask for what we 
really want, and only this, that we may spend this day in fearless¬ 
ness, without confusing pain with joy, or fear with love. 


w 339 L 2 . 
" Father, this is Your day. 
It is a day in which I woidd do 

nothing by myself, but hear Your Voice in everything I do; requesting 

only what You offer me, accepting only Thoughts You share with me." 

W(593) 


1625 


11-621 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 340 "I can be free of suffering today." 

W 340 L 1. 
" Father, I thank You for today, and for the freedom I am 
certain it will bring. 
This day is holy, for today Your Son will be re¬ 
deemed. 
His suffering is done. 
For he will hear Your Voice directing 
him to find Christ's vision through forgiveness, and be free forever 
from all suffering. 
Thanks for today, my Father. 
I was born into this 
world but to achieve this day, and what it holds in joy and freedom for 
Your holy Son, and for the world he made, which is released along with 
him today." 

W 340 L 2. 
Be glad today! Be glad! There is no room for anything but 
joy and thanks today. 
Our Father has redeemed His Son this day. 

Not one of us but will be saved today. 
Not one who will remain in 
fear, and none the Father will not gather to Himself, awake in 
Heaven in the Heart of Love. 
W(594) 


11-622 


1626 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


(13) What is a Miracle? (W 340 W13) 

w 340 W13 l. 
A miracle is a correction. 
It does not create, nor really 
change at all. 
It merely looks on devastation, and reminds the mind 
that what it sees is false. 
It undoes error, but does not attempt to go 
beyond perception, nor exceed the function of forgiveness. 
Thus it 
stays within time's limits. 
Yet it paves the way for the return of 
timelessness and love's awakening, for fear must slip away under 
the gentle remedy it gives. 


W 340 W13 2. 
A miracle contains the gift of grace, for it is given and 
received as one. 
And thus it illustrates the law of truth the world 
does not obey, because it fails entirely to understand its ways. 
A 
miracle inverts perception which was upside-down before, and thus 
it ends the strange distortions that were manifest. 
Now is percep¬ 
tion open to the truth. 
Now is forgiveness seen as justified. 


W340W13 3. 
Forgiveness is the home of miracles. 
The eyes of Christ 
deliver 766 them to all they look upon in mercy and in love. 
Percep¬ 
tion stands corrected in His sight, and what was meant to curse has 
come to bless. 
Each lily of forgiveness offers all the world the silent 
miracle of love. 
And each is laid before the Word of God upon the 
universal altar to Creator and creation, in the Light of perfect purity 
and endless joy. 


w 340 W13 4. 
The miracle is taken first on faith, because to ask for it 
implies the mind has been made ready to conceive of what it cannot 
see and does not understand. 
Yet faith will bring its witnesses to 
show that what it rested on is really there. 
And thus the miracle will 
justify your faith in it, and show it rested on a world more real than 
what you saw before; a world redeemed from what you thought 
you saw. 


W 340 W13 5. 
Miracles fall like drops of healing rain from Heaven on 
a dry and dusty world, where starved and thirsty creatures came to 
die. 
Now they have water. 
Now the world is green. 
And every- 


766 The Urtext manuscript reads “The eyes of Christ delivers” presenting a grammar problem of 
agreement in number. 
FIP replaces “delivers” with (deliver). 
So do we. 



1627 


11-623 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


where the signs of life spring up, to show that what is born can 
never die, for what has life has immortality. 
W(595) 

Lesson 341 "I can attack but my own sinlessness. 


And it is only that which keeps me safe." 

w 341L l. 
" Father, Your Son is holy. 
I am he on whom You smile in 
love and tenderness so deep and dear and still the universe smiles back 
on You, and shares Your holiness. 
How pure, how safe, how sacred, 
then, are we, abiding in Your smile, with all Your love bestowed upon 
us, living one with You, in brotherhood and Fatherhood complete; in 
sinlessness so perfect that the Lord of Sinlessness conceives us as His 
Son, a universe of Thought completing Him." 
w 341L 2. 
Let us not, then, attack our sinlessness . 
767 For it contains 
the Word of God to us, and in its kind reflection we are saved. 
W(596) 


767 The Urtext manuscript has “ourselves” rather than (our sinlessness) here, which presents problems 
in the next sentence, to what then would “it” refer? We find the word (sinlessness) hardwritten in here 
and deem it to be a valid correction. 
The Notes also has “our sinlessness” here. 



11-624 


1628 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 342 "I let forgiveness rest upon all things. 


For thus forgiveness will be given me." 

w 342 L l. 
"I thank You, Father, for Your plan to save me from the hell 
I made. 
It is not real. 
And You have given me the means to prove its 
unreality to me. 
The key is in my hand, and I have reached the door 
beyond which lies the end of dreams. 
I stand before the gate of Heaven, 
wondering if I should enter in and be at home. 
Let me not wait again 
today. 
Let me forgive all things, and let creation be as You woidd have 
it be, and as it is. 
Let me remember that I am Your Son, and opening 
the door at last, forget illusions in the blazing light of truth, as memory 
of You returns to me." 

w 342 L 2. 
Brother, forgive me now. 
I come to you to take you home 
with me. 
And as we go, the world goes with us on the way to God. 



W(597) 


1629 


11-625 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 343 "I am not asked to make a sacrifice 
To find the mercy and the peace of God." 

1. 
"The end of suffering can not be loss. 
The gift of everything can but 
be gain. 
768 You only give. 
You never take away. 
And You created me 
to be like You, so sacrifice becomes impossible for me as well as You. 
I, 
too, must give, and so all things are given unto me forever and forever. 

As I was created, I remain. 
Your Son can make no sacrifice, for he 
must be complete, having the function of completing You. 
I am com¬ 
plete because I am Your Son. 
I cannot lose, for I can only give. 
And 
everything is mine eternally." 

2. 
The mercy and the peace of God are free. 
Salvation has no cost. 


It is a gift that must be freely given and received, and it is this that 
we would learn today. 
W(598) 


768 Handwritten mark-up suggests(be but gain). 



11-626 


1630 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 344 "Today I learn the law of love; 
that what I give my brother is my gift to me." 

w 344 L l. 
"This is Your law, my Father, not my own. 
I did not under¬ 
stand 769 what giving means, and thought to save what I desired for my¬ 
self alone. 
And as I looked upon the treasure which I thought I had, I 
found an empty place where nothing ever was, or is or will be. 
Who 
can share a dream? And what can an illusion offer me? Yet he whom I 
forgive will give me gifts beyond the worth of anything on earth. 
Let 
my forgiven brothers fill my store with Heaven’s treasures, which 
alone are real. 
Thus is the law of love fulfilled. 
And thus Your Son 
arises and returns to You." 

w 344 L 2. 
How near we are to one another, as we go to God. 
How 
near is He to us. 
How close the ending of the dream of sin, and the 
redemption of the Son of God. 
W(599) 


769 Handwritten mark-up suggests (have not understood). 



1631 


11-627 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 345 "I offer only miracles today. 


For I would have them be returned to me." 

W 345 L 1. 
“Father, a miracle reflects Your gifts to me, Your Son. 

And every one I give returns to me, reminding me the law of love is 
universal. 
Even here it takes a form which can be recognized, and seen 
to work. 
The miracles I give are given back in just the form I need to 
help me with the problems I perceive. 
Father, in Heaven it is different, 
for there, there are no needs. 
But here on earth the miracle is closer to 
Your gifts than any other gift which I can give. 
Then let me give this 
gift alone today, which, bom of true forgiveness, lights the way that I 
must travel to remember You." 

w 345 L 2. 
Peace to all seeking hearts today. 
The light has come, to 
offer miracles to bless the tired world. 
It will find rest today, for we 
will offer what we have received. 
W(600) 


11-628 


1632 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 346 "Today the peace of God envelops me. 


And I forget all things except His Love." 

w 346 L l. 
"Father , I wake today with miracles correcting my percep¬ 
tion of all things. 
And so begins a day I share with You as I will share 
eternity, for time has stepped aside today. 
I do not seek the things of 
time, and so I will not look upon them. 
770 Wltat I seek today transcends 
all laws of time and things perceived in time. 
771 I would forget all 
things except Your Love. 
I would abide in You, and know no laws ex¬ 
cept Your law of Love. 
772 And I would find the peace which You cre¬ 
ated for Your Son, forgetting all the foolish toys I made as I behold 
Your glory and my own. 
" 773 

W 346 L 2. 
And when the evening comes today, we will remember 
nothing but the peace of God. 
For we will learn today what peace is 
ours when we forget all things except God's Love. 
W(60l) 


711 Romans 8:5 For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after 
the spirit the things of the spirit. 


771 ICorinthians 2:14 Now the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are 
foolishness unto him; and he cannot know them, because they are spiritually judged. 


772 John 15:4 “Abide in Me, and I in you. 
As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it abides in 
the vine, neither can you, unless you abide in Me.” 

773 ICorinthians 13:11 When I was a child, I spake as a child, I felt as a child, I thought as a child: 
now that I am become a man, I have put away childish things. 



1633 


11-629 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 347 "Anger must come from judgment. 


Judgment is the weapon I would use against myself To 
keep all774 miracles away from me." 

w 347 L l. 
" Father, I want what goes against my will, and do not want 
what is my will to have. 
Straighten my mind, my Father. 
It is sick. 

But You have offered freedom, and I choose to claim Your gift today. 

And so I give all judgment to the One You gave to me to judge for me. 

He sees what I behold, and yet He knows the truth. 
He looks on pain, 
and yet He understands it is not real, and in His understanding it is 
healed. 
He gives the miracles my dreams would hide from my aware¬ 
ness. 
Let Him judge today. 
I do not know my will, but He is sure it is 
Your own. 
And He will speak for me, and call Your miracle to come to 
me." 

W 347 L 2. 
Listen today. 
Be very still, and hear the gentle Voice for 

God assuring you that He has judged you as the Son He loves. 
775 
W(602) 


774 Handwritten mark-up suggests (the miracle) in place of “all miracles”. 


77? Titus 3:2 to speak evil of no man, not to be contentious, to be gentle, shewing all meekness toward 
all men. 



11-630 


1634 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 348 "I have no cause for anger or for fear. 


For You surround me. 
And in every need 
That I perceive Your grace suffices me." 

w 348 L l. 
" Father, let me remember You are here, and I am not alone. 

Surrounding me is everlasting Love. 
I have no cause for anything ex¬ 
cept the perfect peace and joy I share with You. 
What need have I for 
anger or for fear? Surrounding me is perfect safety. 
Can I be afraid, 
when Your eternal promise goes with me? Surrounding me is perfect 
sinlessness. 
Wlrat can I fear, when You created me in holiness as per¬ 
fect as Your own?" 

w 348 L 2. 
God's grace suffices us in everything that He would have 
us do. 
And only that we choose to be our will as well as His. 
W(603) 


1635 


11-631 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 349 "Today I let Christ's vision look upon 
All things for me and judge them not, but give 
Each one a miracle of love instead." 

w 349 L l. 
"So would I liberate all things I see, and give to them the 
freedom that I seek. 
For thus do I obey the law of love, and give what I 
would find and make my own. 
It will be given me because I have cho¬ 
sen it as the gift I want to give. 
Father, Your gifts are mine. 
Each one 
that I accept gives me a miracle to give. 
And giving as I would receive, 
I learn Your healing miracles belong to me." 
w 349 L 2. 
Our Father knows our needs. 
776 He gives us grace to meet 
them all. 
777 And so we trust in Him to send us miracles to bless the 
world and heal our minds as we return to Him. 
W(604) 


776 Matthew 6:8 Therefore do not be like them. 
For your Father knows the things you have need of 
before you ask Him. 


Matthew 6:32 For after all these things the Gentiles seek. 
For your heavenly Father knows that you 
need all these things. 


777 Acts 20:32 And now I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build 
you up, and to give you the inheritance among all them that are sanctified. 



11-632 


1636 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 350 "Miracles mirror God's eternal Love. 


To offer them is to remember Him, 

And through His memory to save the world." 

w 350 L l. 
"What we forgive becomes a part of us, as we perceive our¬ 
selves. 
The Son of God incorporates all things within himself as You 
created him. 
Your memory depends on his forgiveness. 
What he is, is 
unaffected by his thoughts. 
But what he looks upon is their direct re¬ 
sult. 
Therefore, my Father, I woidd turn to You. 
Only Your memory 
will set me free. 
And only my forgiveness teaches me to let Your mem¬ 
ory return to me, and give it to the world in thankfulness." 
w 350 L 2. 
And as we gather miracles from Him, we will indeed be 
grateful. 
For as we remember Him, His Son will be restored to us in 
the Reality of Love. 
W(605) 


1637 


11-633 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


(14) What am I? (W 350 W14) 


w 350 W14 l. 
"I am God's Son, complete and healed and whole, shining 
in the reflection of His Love. 
In me is His creation sanctified and guar¬ 
anteed eternal life. 
In me is love perfected, fear impossible, and joy es¬ 
tablished without opposite. 
I am the holy home of God Himself. 
I am 
the Heaven where His Love resides. 
I am His holy Sinlessness Itself 
for in my purity abides His own." 

W 350 W14 2. 
Our use for words is almost over now. 
Yet in the final 
days of this one year we gave to God together, you and I, we found 
a single purpose that we shared. 
And thus you joined with me, 778 so 
what I am are you as well. 
The truth of what we are is not for words 
to speak of or 779 describe. 
Yet we can realize our function here, and 
words can speak of this and teach it, too, if we exemplify the words 
in us. 


w 350 W14 3. 
We are the bringers of salvation. 
We accept our part as 
Saviors of the world, which through our joint forgiveness is re¬ 
deemed. 
And this, our gift, is therefore given us. 
We look on eve¬ 
ryone as brothers, and perceive all things as kindly and as good. 


We do not seek a function that is past the gates of Heaven. 
Knowl¬ 
edge will return when we have done our part. 
We are concerned 
only with giving welcome to the truth. 


w 350 W14 4. 
Ours 780 are the eyes through which Christ's vision sees a 
world redeemed from every thought of sin. 
Ours are the ears which 
hear the Voice of God proclaim the world as sinles. 
781 Ours the 
minds which join together as we bless the world. 
And from the 
oneness that we have attained we call to all our brothers, asking 
them to share our peace and consummate our joy. 

w 350 W14 5. 
We are the holy messengers of God who speak for Him, 
and carrying His Word to everyone whom He has sent to us, we 


778 Handwritten mark-up suggests the comma where the Urtext manuscript has a period and new sen- 
tence. 
We agree with the handwriting here, it should be a comma. 


779 Handwritten mark-up suggests (nor). 


780 Urtext manuscript has “Our” and it clearly needs to be “Ours”. 
FIP agrees, and so does the Notes. 


781 Handwritten mark-up suggests ((holy)). 



11-634 


1638 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


learn that It is written 782 on our hearts. 
And thus our minds are 
changed about the aim for which we came and which we seek to 
serve. 
We bring glad tidings to the Son of God, who thought he suf¬ 
fered. 
783 Now is he redeemed. 
And as he sees the gate of Heaven 
stand open before him, he will enter in and disappear into the Heart 
of God. 
W(606) 


7R: Jeremiah 31:33 But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, 
saith the LORD; I will put my law in their inward parts, and in their heart will I write it; and I will be 
their God, and they shall be my people: 

Romans 2:15 Who show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing wit¬ 
ness, and between themselves their thoughts accusing or else excusing them. 


783 Luke 1:19 And the angel answered and said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of 
God, and was sent to speak to you and bring you these glad tidings.” 

Luke 8:1 Now it came to pass, afterward, that He went through every city and village, preaching and 
bringing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God. 
And the twelve were with Him, 


1639 


11-635 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 351 "My sinless brother is my guide to peace. 


My sinful brother is my guide to pain. 


And which I choose to see I will behold." 

w 351L l. 
"Who is my brother but Your holy Son? And if I see him 
sinful, I proclaim myself a sinner; not a Son of God; alone and friend¬ 
less in a fearful world. 
Yet this perception is a choice I make, and can 
relinquish. 
I can also see my brother sinless, as Your holy Son. 
And 
with this choice I see my sinlessness, my everlasting Comforter and 
Friend beside me, and my way secure and clear. 
Choose, then, for me, 
my Father, through Your Voice. 
For He alone gives judgment in Your 
Name." W(607) 


11-636 


1640 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 352 "Judgment and love are opposites. 
From one 
Come all the sorrows of the world. 
But from 
The Other comes the peace of God Himself." 

w 352 L l. 
"Forgiveness looks on sinlessness alone, and judges not. 

Through this I come to You. 
judgment will bind my eyes and make me 
blind. 
Yet love, reflected in forgiveness here, reminds me You have 
given me a way to find Your peace again. 
I am redeemed when I elect 
to follow in this way. 
You have not left me comfortless. 
784 I have 
within me both the memory of You, and One Who leads me to It. 
Fa¬ 
ther, I would hear Your Voice, and find Your peace today. 
For I would 
love my own Identity, and find in Him the memory of You." W(608) 


784 John 14:18 “I will not leave you comfortless; I will come to you”. 



1641 


11-637 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 353 "My eyes, my tongue, my hands, my feet today 
Have but one purpose; to be given Christ 
To use to bless the world with miracles." 

w 353 L l. 
" Father, I give all that is mine today to Christ, to use in any 
way that best will serve the purpose which I share with Him. 
Nothing 
is mine alone, for He and I have joined in purpose. 
Thus has learning 
come almost to its appointed end. 
A while I work with Him to serve 
His purpose. 
Then I lose myself in my Identity, and recognize that 
Christ is but my Self." W(609) 


11-638 


1642 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 354 "We stand together, Christ and I, in peace 
And certainty of purpose. 
And in Him 
Is His Creator, as He is in me." 

w 354 L l. 
"My oneness with the Christ establishes me as Your Son, 
beyond the reach of time, and wholly free of every law but Yours. 
I 
have no self except the Christ in me. 
I have no purpose but His own. 

And He is like His Father. 
Thus must I be one with You as well as 
Him. 
For who is Christ except Your Son as You created Him? And 
what am I except the Christ in me?" W(610) 


1643 


11-639 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 355 "There is no end to all the peace and joy 

And all the miracles that I will give 

When I accept God's Word. 
Why not today?" 

w 355 L l. 
"Why should I wait, my Father, for the joy You promised 
me? For You will keep Your Word You gave Your Son in exile. 
I am 
sure my treasure waits for me, and I need but reach out my hand to 
find it. 
Even now my fingers touch it. 
It is very close. 
I need not wait 
an instant more, to be at peace forever. 
It is You I choose, and my 
Identity along with You. 
Your Son woidd be Himself and know You 
as his Father and Creator and his Love." W(6ii) 


11-640 


1644 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 356 "Sickness is but another name for sin. 


Healing is but another Name for God. 


The miracle is thus a call to Him." 

w 356 L l. 
" Father, You promised You umdd never fail to answer any 
call Your Son might make to You. 
It does not matter where he is, what 
seems to he his problem, nor what he believes he has become. 
He is 
Your Son, and You will answer him. 
The miracle reflects Your Love, 
and thus it answers him. 
Your Name replaces every thought of sin, 
and who is sinless cannot suffer pain. 
Your Name gives answer to 
Your Son, because to call Your Name is but to call his own." W( 612 ) 


1645 


11-641 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


Lesson 357 "Truth answers every call we make to 
God, Responding first with miracles, and then 
Returning unto us to be Itself." 

w 357 L l. 
" Forgiveness, truth's reflection, tells me how to offer mira¬ 
cles, and thus escape the prison house in which I think I live. 
Your 
holy Son is pointed out to me, first in my brother; then in me. 
Your 
Voice instructs me patiently to hear Your Word and give as I receive. 

And as I look upon Your Son today, I hear Your Voice instructing me 
to find the way to You as You appointed that the way shall be: 'Behold 
his sinlessness and be you healed’." W(613) 


11-642 


1646 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 358 "No call to God can be unheard or left 
Unanswered. 
And of this I can be sure; 

His answer is the one I really want." 

w 358 L l. 
"You Who remember what I really am alone remember what 
I really want. 
You speak for God, and so You speak for me, 785 and what 
You give me comes from God Himself. 
Your Voice, my Father, then is 
mine as well, and all I want is what You offer me, in just the form You 
chose that it be mine. 
Let me remember all I do not know, and let my 
voice be still, remembering. 
786 But let me not forget Your Love and 
care, keeping Your promise to Your Son in my awareness always. 
Let 
me not forget myself is nothing, but my Self is All." W(614) 


785 Urtext manuscript has period and sentence break here. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests the comma 
only, with which suggestion we agree. 


786 John 14:26 “But the Comforter, even the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he 
shall teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all that I said unto you.” 


1647 


11-643 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 359 "God's answer is some form of peace. 


All pain Is healed; all misery replaced with joy. 


All prison doors are opened. 
And all sin 
Is understood as merely a mistake." 

w 359 L l. 
" Father, today we will forgive Your world, and let creation 
be Your own. 
We have misunderstood all things. 
But we have not 
made sinners of the holy Sons of God. 
What You created sinless so 
abides forever and forever. 
Such are we. 
And we rejoice to learn that 
we have made mistakes which have no real effects on us. 
Sin is impos¬ 
sible, and on this fact forgiveness rests upon a certain base more solid 
than the shadow world we see. 
Help us forgive, for we would be re¬ 
deemed. 
Help us forgive, for we woidd be at peace." W(615) 


11-644 


1648 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume II Workbook 


Lesson 360 "Peace be to me, the holy Son of God. 


Peace to my brother, who is one with me. 


Let all the world be blessed with peace through us." 

w 360 L l. 
" Father, it is Your peace that I would give, receiving it of 
You. 
I am Your Son, forever just as You created me, for the Great 
Rays remain forever still and undisturbed within me. 
I would reach to 
them in silence and in certainty, for nowhere else can certainty be 
found. 
Peace be to me, and peace to all the world. 
In holiness were we 
created, and in holiness do we remain. 
Your Son is like to You in per¬ 
fect sinlessness, and with this thought we gladly say 'Amen'." W(616) 


1649 


11-645 


PROOF 


COPY 


Part 2 


FinalLessons 787 (W 360 FL) 

w 360 FL l. 
Our final lessons will be left as free of words as possible. 

We use them but at the beginning of our practicing, and only to re¬ 
mind us that we seek to go beyond them. 
Let us turn to Him Who 
leads the way and makes our footsteps sure. 
To Him we leave these 
lessons, as to Him we give our lives henceforth. 
For we would not 
return again to the belief in sin, which made the world seem ugly 
and unsafe, attacking and destroying, dangerous in all its ways and 
treacherous beyond the hope of trust and the escape from pain, 
w 360 FL 2. 
His is the only way to find the peace that God has given 
us. 
It is His way that everyone must travel in the end, because it is 
this ending God Himself appointed. 
In the dream of time it seems 
to be far off. 
And yet, in truth, it is already here; already serving us 
as gracious guidance in the way to go. 
Let us together follow in this 
way that truth points out to us. 
And let us be the leaders of our 
many brothers who are seeking for the way but find it not. 


W 360 FL 3. 
And to this purpose let us dedicate our minds, directing 
all our thoughts to serve the function of salvation. 
Unto us the aim 
is given to forgive the world. 
788 It is the goal that God has given us. 

It is His ending to the dream we seek, and not our own. 
For all that 
we forgive we will not fail to recognize as part of God Himself. 
And 
thus His memory is given back completely and complete. 


W 360 FL 4. 
It is our function to remember Him on earth, as it is given 
us to be His own completion in reality. 
So let us not forget our goal 
is shared. 
For it is that remembrance which contains the memory of 
God, and points the way to Him and to the Heaven of His peace. 

And shall we not forgive our brother, who can offer this to us? He 
is the way, the truth and life that show the way to us . 
789 In him re- 


787 The words “Final Lessons” are not present in the Urtext manuscript. 


88 John 20:23 “If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you retain the sins of any, they 
are retained.” 

789 John 14:6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. 
No one comes to the Father ex¬ 
cept through Me.” 


11-646 


1650 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


sides salvation, offered us through our forgiveness given unto him. 

W(617) 

W 360 FL 5. 
We will not end this year without the gift our Father 
promised to His holy Son. 
We are forgiven now , 790 and we are 
saved from all the wrath we thought belonged to God, and found it 
was a dream. 
We are restored to sanity, in which we understand 
that anger is insane, attack is mad, and vengeance merely foolish 
fantasy. 
We have been saved from wrath because we learned we 
were mistaken. 
Nothing more than that. 
And is a Father 791 angry at 
His 792 Son 793 because he failed to understand the truth? 

W 360 FL 6. 
We come in honesty to Him 794 and say we did not under¬ 
stand, and ask Him to help us to learn His lessons through the Voice 
of His own Teacher. 
Would He hurt His Son? Or would He rush to 
answer him, and say, "This is my Son, and all I have is his ?" 795 Be 
certain He will answer thus, for these are His own Words to you. 

And more than that can no-one ever have, for in these Words is all 
there is, and all that there will be throughout all time and in eternity. 

W(618) 


790 Urtext manuscript has period and new sentence here. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests only a comma, 
with which suggestion we agree. 


791 Handwritten mark-up suggests (father). 


792 Handwritten mark-up suggests (his). 


793 Handwritten mark-up suggests (son). 


794 Handwritten mark-up suggests (God) instead of “Him”. 


793 Luke 15:31 And he said to him, “Son, you are always with me, and all that I have is yours.” 


1651 


11-647 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


Lesson 361-365. 
796 "This holy instant would I give to You. 
Be 
You in charge. 
For I would follow You, Certain that Your 
direction gives me peace." 

w 361L l. 
If I need a word to help me. 
He will give it to me. 
If I need 
a thought, that will He also give. 
797 And if I need but stillness and a 
tranquil, open mind, these are the gifts I will receive of Him. 
He is 
in charge by my request. 
And He will hear and answer me, because 
He speaks for God my Father and His holy Son. 
W(619) 


7% The Urtext manuscript says “3 60-365” but there is already a Lesson 360, so this needs to be “361- 
365”. 


7,7 Handwritten mark-up suggests (And). 



11-648 


1652 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume II Workbook 


Epilogue 798 (W361 EP) 

W 361 EP 1 . 
This course is a beginning, not an end. 
Your Friend goes 
with you. 
You are not alone. 
No-one who calls on Him can call in 
vain. 
Whatever troubles you, be certain that He has the answer, and 
will gladly give it to you if you simply turn to Him and ask it of 
Him. 
He will not withhold all answers that you need for anything 
that seems to trouble you. 
He knows the way to solve all problems 
and resolve all doubts. 
His certainty is yours. 
You need but ask it 
of him, and it will be given you. 


W 361 EP 2. 
You are as certain of arriving home as is the pathway of 
the sun laid down before it rises, after it has set, and in the half-lit 
hours in between. 
Indeed, your pathway is more certain still, for it 
can not be possible to change the course of those whom God has 
called to Him. 
Therefore obey your will, and follow Him Whom 
you accepted as your voice, to speak of what you really want and 
really need. 
His is the Voice of God, and also yours. 
And thus He 
speaks of freedom and of truth. 


w 361 EP 3. 
No more specific lessons are assigned, for there is no 
more need of them. 
Henceforth, hear but the Voice for God and for 
your Self when you retire from the world, to seek reality instead. 


He will direct your efforts, telling you exactly what to do, how to 
direct your mind, and when to come to Him in silence, asking for 
His sure direction and His certain Word. 
His is the Word that God 
has given you. 
His is the Word you chose to be your own. 

w 361 EP 4. 
And now I place you in His hands, to be His faithful fol¬ 
lowers, with Him as Guide through every difficulty and all pain that 
you may think is real. 
Nor will He give you pleasures that will pass 
away, for He gives only the eternal and the good. 
Let Him prepare 
you further. 
He has earned your trust by speaking daily to you of 
your Father and yourbrother and your Self. 
He will continue; now 
you walk with Him as certain as is He of where you go; as sure as 


7fls The word “Epilogue” is not present in the Urtext manuscript. 



1653 


11-649 


PROOF 


COPY 



Part 2 


He of how you should proceed, as confident as He is of the W(620) 
goal, and of your safe arrival in the end. 


w 361EP 5. 
The end is certain, and the means as well. 
To this we say 
"Amen." We 799 will be told exactly what God wills for us 800 each 
time there is a choice to make. 
And He will speak for God and for 
your Self, thus making sure that hell will claim you not, and that 
each choice you make brings Heaven nearer to your reach. 
And so 
we walk with Him from this time on, and turn to Him for guidance 
and for peace and right 801 direction. 
Joy attends our way . 
802 For we 
go homeward to an open door which God has held unclosed to wel¬ 
come us . 
803 

W 361 EP 6. 
We trust our ways to Him and say "Amen." In peace 
we will continue in His way, and trust all things to Him. 
In confi¬ 
dence we wait His answers, as we ask His will in everything we do. 

He loves Gods Son as we would love him, and He teaches us how to 
behold him through His eyes, and love him as He does. 
You do not 
walk alone. 
God's angels hover close, and all about. 
His Love sur¬ 
rounds you , 804 and of this be sure: that I will never leave you com¬ 
fortless . 
805 W(621) 


1Qq Handwritten mark-up suggests (You) (it does this in shorthand). 
Notes clearly has shorthand for 
“we.” 

800 Handwritten mark-up suggests (you) (it does this in shorthand). 
Notes clearly has “us.” 

801 Handwritten mark-up suggests (sure) 

802 Isaiah 55:12 For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills 
shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. 


803 John 10:9 “I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and go out, 
and shall find pasture.” 

804 Isaiah 63:9 In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his 
love and in his pity he redeemed them; and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. 


803 John 15:10 “If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my Fa¬ 
ther’s commandments, and abide in his love.” 


11-650 


1654 


PROOF 


COPY 



Urtext Volume III: Manual for Teachers 


1655 


PROOF 


COPY 


1656 

PROOF COPY 


Urtext Volume III - Manual for Teachers 

Table of Contents 

1. 
Introduction.1 

2. 
Who Are God’s Teachers?.2 

3. 
Who Are Their Pupils?.4 

4. 
What Are the Levels of Teaching?.6 

5. 
What Are the Characteristics of God’s Teachers?.8 

A. 
Introduction.8 

B. 
Trust.9 

C. 
Honesty.12 

D. 
Tolerance.12 

E. 
Gentleness.13 

F. 
Joy.14 

G. 
Defenselessness.14 

H. 
Generosity.14 

I. 
Patience.15 

J. 
Faithfulness.16 

K. 
Open-Mindedness.17 

6. 
How Is Healing Accomplished?.18 

A. 
Introduction.18 

B. 
The perceived purpose of sickness.18 

C. 
The shift in perception.19 

D. 
The function of the Teacher of God.20 

7. 
Is Healing Certain?.22 

8. 
Should Healing Be Repeated?.23 

9. 
How Can the Perception of Order of Difficulties Be Avoided?.. 
25 

10. 
Are Changes Required In the Life Situations of God’s 

Teachers?.28 

11. 
Howls Judgment Relinquished?.29 

12. 
How Is Peace Possible In This World?.31 

13. 
How Many Teachers of God Are Needed to Save the World?.33 

14. 
What Is the Real Meaning of Sacrifice?.35 

15. 
How Will the World End?.38 

16. 
Is Each One to be Judged In the End?.40 

17. 
How Should the Teacher of God Spend His Day?.41 

18. 
How Do God’s Teachers Deal With Their Pupils’ Thoughts of 

Magic?.46 

19. 
How Is Correction Made?.49 

20. 
What Is Justice?.51 

1657 IH-iii 

PROOF COPY 




































Table of Contents 


21. 
What Is the Peace of God?.53 

22. 
What Is the Role of Words in Healing?.55 

23. 
How Are Healing and Atonement Related?.57 

24. 
Does Jesus Have a Special Place in Healing?.60 

25. 
Is Reincarnation True?.62 

26. 
Are “Psychic” Powers Desirable?.65 

27. 
Can God Be Reached Directly? .67 

28. 
What Is Death? .69 

29. 
What Is The Resurrection?.71 

30. 
As For The Rest .73 


Ill-iv 


PROOF 


1658 


COPY 












Urtext Volume III; Manual for Teachers 


1. 
Introduction 

M 1A l. 
The 1 role of teaching and learning is actually reversed in the 
thinking of the world. 
The reversal is characteristic. 
It seems as if 
the teacher and the learner are separated, the teacher giving 
something to the learner rather than to himself. 
Further, the act of 
teaching is regarded as a special activity in which one engages only 
a relatively small proportion of one's time. 
The course, on the other 
hand, emphasizes that to teach is to learn, so that teacher and 
learner are the same. 
It also emphasizes that teaching is a constant 
process; it goes on every moment of the day and continues into 
sleeping thoughts as well. 


M l A 2. 
To teach is to demonstrate. 
There are only two thought 
systems, and you demonstrate that you believe one or the other is 
true all the time. 
From your demonstration others learn and so do 
you. 
The question is not whether you will teach, for in that there is 
no choice. 
The purpose of the course might be said to provide you 
with a means of choosing what you want to teach on the basis of 
what you want to learn. 
You cannot give to someone else , 2 and this 
you learn through teaching. 
Teaching is but a call to witnesses to 
attest to what you believe. 
It is a method of conversion. 
This is not 
done by words alone. 
Any situation must be to you a chance to 
teach others what you are and what they are to you. 
No more than 
that, but also never less. 


M l A 3. 
The curriculum that 3 you set up is therefore determined 
exclusively by what you think you are, and what you believe the 
relationship of others is to you. 
In the formal teaching situation, 
these questions may be totally unrelated to what you think you are 
teaching. 
Yet it is impossible not to use the content of any situation 


1 APRIL 12, 1972 

2 FIP inserts “but only to yourself.” That insertion also appears written in between the lines in the 
Notes. 


3 FIP omits “that” but it is distinctly present in the Notes. 



1659 


III-l 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


on behalf of what you really teach and therefore 4 learn. 
To this the 
verbal content of your teaching is quite irrelevant. 
It may coincide 
with it or it may not. 
It is the teaching underlying what you say that 
teaches you. 
Teaching but reinforces what you believe about 
yourself. 
Its fundamental M(2) purpose is to diminish self-doubt. 

This does not mean that the self you are trying to protect is real. 
But 
it does mean that the self you think is real is what you teach. 


M l A 4. 
This is inevitable. 
There is no escape from it. 
How could it 
be otherwise? Everyone who follows the world's curriculum, and 
everyone here does follow it until he changes his mind, teaches 
solely to convince himself that he is what he is not. 
Herein is the 
purpose of the world. 
What else, then, would its curriculum be? 

Into this hopeless and closed learning situation, which teaches 
nothing but despair and death, God sends His teachers. 
And as 
they teach His lessons of joy and hope, their learning finally 
becomes complete. 


M l A 5. 
Except for God's teachers there would be no 5 hope of 
salvation, for the world of sin would be forever real. 
The self- 
deceiving must deceive, for they must teach deception. 
And what 
else is hell? This is a manual for the teachers of God. 
They are not 
perfect or they would not be here. 
Yet it is their mission to become 
perfect here, and so they teach perfection over and over, in many, 
many ways, until they have learned it. 
And then they are seen no 
more, although their thoughts remain a source of strength and truth 
forever. 
Who are they? How are they chosen? What do they do? 
How can they work out their own salvation and the salvation of the 
world? This manual attempts to answer these questions. 
M(3) 

2. 
Who Are God's Teachers? 

M 2 A l. 
A teacher of God is anyone who chooses to be one. 
His 
qualifications consist solely in this; somehow, somewhere he has 
made a deliberate choice in which he did not see his interests as 


4 FIP inserts “really” which is also written between the lines in the Notes. 


5 FIP changes “no” to “little.” It is “no” in the Notes. 



III-2 


1660 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


apart from someone else's. 
Once he has done that his road is 
established and his direction is sure. 
A light has entered the 
darkness. 
6 It may be a single light, but that is enough. 
He has 
entered an agreement with God, even if he does not yet believe in 
Him. 
He has become a bringer of salvation. 
7 He has become a 
teacher of God. 


M 2 A 2. 
They come from all over the world. 
They come from all 
religions and from no religion. 
They are the ones who have 
answered. 
The Call is universal. 
It goes on all the time everywhere. 

It calls for teachers to speak for it and redeem the world. 
Many hear 
it but few will answer. 
8 But 9 it is all a matter of time. 
Everyone will 
answer in the end, but the end can be a long, long way off. 
It is 
because of this that the plan of the teachers was established. 
Their 
function is to save time. 
Each one begins as a single light, but with 
the Call at its center it is a light that cannot be limited. 
And each 
one saves a thousand years of time as the world judges it. 
To the 
Call itself time has no meaning. 


M 2 A 3. 
There is a course for every teacher of God. 
The form of the 
course varies greatly. 
So do the particular teaching aids involved. 

But the content of the course never changes. 
Its central theme is 
always, "God's Son is guiltless, and in his innocence is his 
salvation." It can be taught by actions or thoughts; in words or 
soundlessly; in any language or in no language; in any place or time 
or manner. 
It does not matter who the teacher was before he heard 
the Call. 
He has become a savior by his answering. 
He has seen 
someone else as himself. 
He has therefore found his own salvation 
and the salvation of the world. 
In his rebirth is the world reborn. 

M(4) 


6 Luke 1:79 “To give light to those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death, To guide our feet into 
the way of peace.” 

John 1:5 And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it. 


7 Luke 1:77 “To give knowledge of salvation to His people by the remission of their sins,” 

8 Matthew 20:16 “So the last will be first, and the first last. 
For many are called, but few chosen.” 

9 FIP changes “But” to “Yet.” The Notes has “yet.” 


PROOF 1661 COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 2 A 4. 
This 10 is a manual for a special curriculum, intended for 
teachers of a special form of the universal course. 
There are many 
thousands of other forms, all with the same outcome. 
They merely 
save time. 
Yet it is time alone that winds on wearily, and the world 
is very tired now. 
It is old and worn and without hope. 
There was 
never a question of outcome, for what can change the Will of God? 
But time, with its illusions of change and death, wears out the world 
and all things in it. 
Yet time has an ending, and it is this that the 
teachers of God are appointed to bring about. 
For time is in their 
hands. 
Such was their choice, and it is given them. 


3 . 
Who Are Their Pupils? 

M 3 A l. 
Certain pupils have been assigned to each of God's teachers, 
and they will begin to look for him as soon as he has answered the 
Call. 
They were chosen for him because the form of the universal 
curriculum that he will teach is best for them in view of their level of 
understanding. 
His pupils have actually * 11 been waiting for him, for 
his coming is certain. 
Again, it is only a matter of time. 
Once he has 
chosen to fulfill his role, they are ready to fulfill theirs. 
Time waits 
on his choice, but not whom he will serve. 
When he is ready to 
learn, the opportunities to teach will be provided for him. 


M 3 A 2. 
In order to understand the teaching-learning plan of 
salvation, it is necessary to grasp the concept of time which 12 the 
course sets forth. 
Atonement corrects illusions, not truth. 


Therefore, it corrects what never was. 
Further, the plan for this 
correction was established and completed simultaneously, for the 
Will of God is entirely apart from time. 
So is all reality, being of 
Him. 
The instant the idea of separation entered the mind of God's 
Son, in that same instant was God's Answer given. 
In time this 
happened very long ago. 
In reality it never happened at all. 
M(5) 


!»(April 27 1972) 

11 Handwritten mark-up suggests the insertion of “actually.” The Notes has “actually.” 

12 FIP changes “which” to “that.” The Notes has “which.” 


III-4 


1662 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 3 A 3. 
The world of time is the world of illusion. 
What happened 
long ago seems to be happening now. 
Choices made long since 
appear to be open; yet to be made. 
What has been learned and 
understood and long ago passed by is looked upon as a new 
thought, a fresh idea, a different approach. 
Because your will is free 
you can accept what has already happened at any time you choose, 
and only then will you realize that it was always there. 
As the 
course emphasizes, you are not free to choose the curriculum, or 
even the form in which you will learn it. 
You are free, however, to 
decide when you want to learn it. 
And as you accept it, it is already 
learned. 


M 3 A 4. 
Time really, then, goes backward to an instant so ancient 
that it is beyond all memory and past even the possibility of 
remembering. 
Yet because it is an instant that is relived again and 
again and still again, it seems to be now. 
And thus it is that pupil 
and teacher seem to come together in the present, finding each other 
as if they had not met before. 
The pupil comes at the right time to 
the right place. 
This is inevitable, because he made the right choice 
in that ancient instant which he now relives. 
So has the teacher, too, 
made an inevitable choice out of an ancient past. 
God's Will in 
everything but seems to take time in the working-out. 
What could 
delay the power of eternity? 

M 3 A 5. 
When pupil and teacher come together, a teaching-learning 
situation begins. 
For the teacher is not really the one who does the 
teaching. 
God's Teacher speaks to any two who join together for 
learning purposes. 
13 The relationship is holy because of that 
purpose, and God has promised to send His Spirit into any holy 
relationship. 
In the teaching-learning situation, each one learns that 
giving and receiving are the same. 
The demarcations they have 
drawn between their roles, their minds, their bodies, their needs, 
their interests, and all the differences they thought separated them 
from one another, fade and grow dim and disappear. 
Those who 


13 Matthew 18:20 “For where two or three are gathered together in My name, I am there in the midst of 
them.” 


1663 


III-5 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


would learn the same course share one interest and one goal. 
And 
thus he who was the learner becomes a teacher M(6) of God Himself, 
for he has made the one decision that gave his teacher to him. 
He 
has seen in another person the same interests as his own. 


4 . 
What Are the Levels of Teaching ? 

M 4 A l. 
The teachers of God have no set teaching level. 
Each 
teaching-learning situation involves a different relationship at the 
beginning, although the ultimate goal is always the same; to make of 
the relationship a holy relationship, in which both can look upon the 
Son of God as sinless. 
There is no-one from whom a teacher of God 
cannot learn, so there is no-one whom he cannot teach. 
However, 
from a practical point of view he cannot meet everyone, nor can 
everyone find him. 
Therefore, the plan includes very specific 
contacts to be made for each teacher of God. 
There are no accidents 
in salvation. 
Those who are to meet will meet, because together 
they have the potential for a holy relationship. 
They are ready for 
each other. 


M 4 A 2. 
The simplest level of teaching appears to be quite 
superficial. 
It consists of what seem to be very casual encounters; a 
chance meeting of two apparent strangers in an elevator, a child 
who is not looking where he is going running into an adult "by 
accident," 14 two students who happen 15 to walk home together. 


These are not chance encounters. 
Each of them has the potential for 
becoming a teaching-learning situation. 
16 Perhaps the seeming 
strangers in the elevator will smile to one another, perhaps the 
man 17 will not scold the child for bumping into him; perhaps the 
students will become friends. 
Even at the level of the most casual 
encounter, it is possible for two people to lose sight of separate 


14 FIP changes “accident” to “chance.” The Notes has “accident.” 

15 FIP changes “who happen” to “happening.” The Notes has “who happen.” 

16 The Urtext manuscript has this sentence originally typed as “Each of them has a potential for 
becoming teaching-learning situations.” Handwritten mark-up changes the sentence to the way it is in 
the Notes, which is also how it appears above. 


17 FIP changes “man” to “adult.” The Notes has “man.” 


1664 

PROOF COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


interests, if only for a moment. 
That moment will be enough. 

Salvation has come. 
M(7) 

M 4 A 3. 
It is difficult to understand that levels of teaching the 
universal course is a concept as meaningless in reality as is time. 


The illusion of one permits the illusion of the other. 
In time, the 
teacher of God seems to begin to change his mind about the world 
with a 18 single decision, and then learns more and more about the 
new direction as he teaches it. 
We have covered the illusion of time 
already, but the illusion of levels of teaching seems to be something 
different. 
Perhaps the best way to demonstrate that these levels 
cannot exist is simply to say that any level of the teaching-learning 
situation is part of God's plan for Atonement, and His plan can have 
no levels, being a reflection of His Will. 
Salvation is always ready 
and always there. 
God's teachers work at different levels, but the 
result is always the same. 


M 4 A 4. 
Each teaching-learning situation is maximal in the sense that 
each person involved will learn the most that he can from the other 
person at that time. 
In this sense, and in this sense only, we can 
speak of levels of teaching. 
Using the term in this way, the second 
level of teaching is a more sustained relationship, in which, for a 
time, two people enter into a fairly intense teaching-learning 
situation and then appear to separate. 
As with the first level, these 
meetings are not accidental, nor is what appears to be the end of the 
relationship a real end. 
Again, each has learned the most he can at 
the time. 
Yet all who meet will someday meet again, for it is the 
destiny of all relationships to become holy. 
God is not mistaken in 
His Son. 


M 4 A 5. 
The third level of teaching occurs in relationships which, 
once they are formed, are lifelong. 
These are teaching-learning 
situations in which each person is given a chosen learning partner 
who presents him with unlimited opportunities for learning. 
These 
relationships are generally few, because their existence implies that 


18 The manuscript has “the.” Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “the” to “a” which reflects the 


Notes. 



1665 


III-7 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


those involved have reached a stage simultaneously in which the 
teaching-learning balance is actually perfect. 
This does not mean 
that M(8) they necessarily recognize this; in fact, they generally do 
not. 
They may even be quite hostile to each other for some time, 
and perhaps for life. 
Yet should they decide to learn it, the perfect 
lesson is before them and can be learned. 
And if they decide to 
learn that lesson, they become the saviors of the teachers who falter 
and may even seem to fail. 
No teacher of God can fail to find the 
Help he needs. 


5. 
What Are the Characteristics of God's Teachers ? 

A. 
Introduction 

M 5 A l. 
The 19 surface traits of God's teachers are not at all alike. 


They do not look alike to the body's eyes, they come from vastly 
different backgrounds, their experiences of the world vary greatly, 
and their superficial "personalities" are quite distinct. 
Nor at the 
beginning stages of their functioning as teachers of God, have they 20 
yet acquired the deeper characteristics that will establish them as 
what they are. 
God gives special gifts to His teachers because they 
have a special role in His plan for Atonement. 
Their specialness is, 
of course, only temporary; set in time as a means of leading out of 
time. 
These special gifts, born in the holy relationship toward which 
the teaching-learning situation is geared, become characteristic of all 
teachers of God who have advanced in their own learning. 
In this 
respect they are all alike. 


M 5 A 2. 
All differences among the Sons of God are temporary. 

Nevertheless, in time it can be said that the advanced teachers of 
God have the following characteristics: 


19 May 26, 1972 

20 FIP inserts “as” after “they.” This does not appear to be present in the Notes , but the Notes legibility 
is poor, leaving the question somewhat open. 



III-8 


1666 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


B. 
Trust 

M 5 B l. 
This is the foundation on which their ability to fulfill their 
function rests. 
Perception is 21 the 22 result of learning. 
In fact, 
perception is learning, because cause and effect are never separated. 

The teachers of God have trust in the world, because they have 
learned it is not governed by the laws the M(9) world made up. 
It is 
governed by a Power which is in them but not of them. 
23 It is this 
Power that keeps all things safe. 
It is through this Power that the 
teachers of God look on a forgiven world. 


M 5 B 2. 
When this Power has once been experienced, it is impossible 
to trust one's own petty strength again. 
Who would attempt to fly 
with the tiny wings of a sparrow when the mighty power of an 
eagle has been given him? And who would place his faith in the 
shabby offerings of the ego when the gifts of God are laid before 
him? What is it that induces them to make the shift? 

M 5 B 3. 
First, they must go through what might be called "a period 
of undoing." This need not be painful, but it usually is so 
experienced. 
It seems as if things are being taken away, and it is 
rarely understood initially that their lack of value is merely being 
recognized. 
How can lack of value be perceived unless the 
perceiver is in a position where he must see things in a different 
light? He is not yet at a point at which he can make the shift entirely 
internally. 
And so the plan will sometimes call for changes in what 
seem to be external circumstances. 
These changes are always 
helpful. 
When the teacher of God has learned that much, he goes on 
to the second stage. 


M 5 B 4. 
Next, the teacher of God must go through "a period of 
sorting-out." This is always somewhat difficult because, having 


21 FIP adds emphasis. 
The Notes does not. 


22 The manuscript has “a”; Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “the” instead of “a” which reflects the 
Notes. 


23 John 15:19 “If you were of the world, the world would love its own. 
Yet because you are not of the 
world, but I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.” 

1 John 4:4 “Ye are of God, my little children, and have overcome them: because greater is he that is in 
you than he that is in the world.” 


1667 


III-9 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


learned that the changes in his life are always helpful, he must now 
decide all things on the basis of whether they increase the 
helpfulness or hamper it. 
He will find that many, if not most of the 
things he valued before will merely hinder his ability to transfer 
what he has learned to new situations as they arise. 
Because he has 
valued what is really valueless, he will not generalize the lesson for 
fear of loss and sacrifice. 
M(10) It takes great learning to understand 
that all things, events, encounters and circumstances are helpful. 
It 
is only to the extent to which they are helpful that any degree of 
reality should be accorded them in this world of illusion. 
The word 
"value" can apply to nothing else. 


M 5 B 5. 
The third stage through 24 which the teacher of God must go 
can be called a "period of relinquishment." If this is interpreted as 
giving up the desirable it will engender enormous conflict. 
Few 
teachers of God escape this distress entirely. 
There is, however, no 
point in sorting out the valuable from the valueless unless the next 
obvious step is taken. 
The third step is rarely if ever begun until the 
second is complete. 
25 Therefore, the period of overlap is apt to be 
one in which the teacher of God feels called upon to sacrifice his 
own best interests on behalf of truth. 
He has not realized as yet how 
wholly impossible such a demand would be. 
He can learn this only 
as he actually does give up the valueless. 
Through this, he learns 
that where he anticipated grief, he finds a happy light-heartedness 
instead; where he thought something was asked of him he finds a 
gift bestowed on 26 him. 


M 5 B 6. 
Now comes "a period of settling down." This is a quiet time, 
in which the teacher of God rests a while in reasonable peace. 
Now 
he consolidates his learning. 
Now he begins to see the transfer 
value of what he has learned. 
Its potential is literally staggering, 
and the teacher of God is now at the point in his progress at which 


24 Urtext manuscript has “to” originally typed. 
Handwritten mark-up inserts “through.” The Notes has 
the glyph for “through.” 

25 This sentence omitted by FIP, (all editions) but it is present in the Notes. 


26 Originally typed “upon,” handwritten mark-up and FIP change “upon” to “on” which reflects the 
Notes. 



m-io 


1668 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


he sees in it his whole way out. 
"Give up what you do not want, 
and keep what you do." How simple is the obvious. 
And how easy 
to do. 
The teacher of God needs this period of respite. 
He has not 
yet come as far as he thinks. 
Yet when he is ready to go on, he goes 
with mighty companions beside him. 
Now he rests a while, and 
gathers them before going on. 
He will not go on from here alone. 

M(ll) 

M 5 B 7. 
The next stage is indeed "a period of unsettling." Now must 
the teacher of God understand that he did not really know what was 
valuable and what was valueless. 
All that he really learned so far 
was that he did not want the valueless and that he did want the 
valuable. 
Yet his own sorting out was meaningless in teaching him 
the difference. 
The idea of sacrifice, so central to his own thought 
system, had made it impossible for him to judge. 
He thought he 
had 27 learned willingness, but now he sees that he does not know 
what the willingness is for. 
And now he must attain a state that 
may remain impossible 28 for a long, long time. 
He must learn to lay 
all judgment aside and ask only what he really wants in every 
circumstance. 
Were not each step in this direction so heavily 
reinforced, it would be hard indeed. 


M 5 B 8. 
And finally, there is "a period of achievement." It is here 
that learning is consolidated. 
Now what was seen as merely 
shadows before become 29 solid gains, to be counted on in all 
"emergencies" as well as tranquil times. 
Indeed, the tranquility is 
their result; the outcome of honest learning, consistency of thought 
and full transfer. 
This is the stage of real peace, for here is Heaven's 
state fully reflected. 
From here, the way to Heaven is open and 
easy. 
In fact, it is here. 
Who would "go" anywhere, if peace of 
mind is already complete? And who would seek to change 


27 FIP omits the word “had.” The Notes includes “had.” 

28 FIP inserts “to reach” which words are not present in the Notes. 


29 Originally typed “becomes.” FIP makes this “become” which reflects the Notes. 
There is more than 
one way to understand the grammar here. 
“What was seen as shadows” could be considered a singular 
noun clause or the subject could be considered “shadows” which is plural, making either “becomes’ or 
“become” appropriate. 
We’re opting for the majority view here. 



1669 


III-ll 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


tranquility for something more desirable? What could be more 
desirable than this? M(12) 

C. 
Honesty 

M 5 C l. 
All other traits of God's teachers rest on trust. 
Once that has 
been achieved the others cannot fail to follow. 
Only the trusting can 
afford honesty, for only they can see its value. 
Honesty does not 
apply only to 30 what you say. 
The term actually means consistency. 

There is nothing you say that contradicts what you think or do; no 
thought opposes any other thought; no act belies your word; and no 
word lacks agreement with another. 
Such are the truly honest. 
At 
no level are they in conflict with themselves. 
Therefore it is 
impossible for them to be in conflict with anyone or anything. 


M 5 C 2. 
The peace of mind which the advanced teachers of God 
experience is largely due to their perfect honesty. 
It is only the wish 
to deceive that makes for war. 
No-one at one with himself can even 
conceive of conflict. 
Conflict is the inevitable result of self- 
deception, and self-deception is dishonesty. 
There is no challenge to 
a teacher of God. 
Challenge implies doubt, and the trust on which 
God's teachers rest secure makes doubt impossible. 
Therefore they 
can only succeed. 
In this as in all things they are honest. 
They can 
only succeed, because they never do their will alone. 
They choose 
for all mankind; for all the world and all things in it; for the 
unchanging and unchangeable beyond appearances; and for the Son 
of God and his Creator. 
How could they not succeed? They choose 
in perfect honesty, sure of their choice of themselves. 


D. 
Tolerance 

M 5 D l. 
God's teachers do not judge. 
To judge is to be dishonest, for 
to judge is to assume a position you do not have. 
Judgment without 
self-deception is impossible. 
Judgment implies that you have been 
deceived in your brothers. 
How then could you not have been 
deceived in yourself? Judgment implies a lack of trust, and trust 


30 Originally typed, “to only,” handwritten mark-up and FIP change this to “only to” which reflects the 
Notes. 



III-12 


1670 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


remains the bedrock of the teacher of God's whole thought system. 

M(l3) Let this be lost and all his learning goes. 
Without judgment 
are all things equally acceptable, for who could judge otherwise? 
Without judgment are all men brothers, for who is there who stands 
apart? Judgment destroys honesty and shatters trust. 
No teacher of 
God can judge and hope to learn. 


E, Gentleness 

M 5 E l. 
Harm is impossible for God's teachers. 
They can neither 
harm nor be harmed. 
Harm is the outcome of judgment. 
It is the 
dishonest act that follows a 31 dishonest thought. 
It is a verdict of 
guilt upon a brother and therefore on oneself. 
It is the end of peace 
and the denial of learning. 
It demonstrates the absence of God's 
curriculum and its replacement by insanity. 
No teacher of God but 
must learn, - and fairly early in his training, - that harmfulness 
completely obliterates his function from his awareness. 
It will make 
him confused, fearful, angry and suspicious. 
It will make the Holy 
Spirit's lessons impossible to learn. 
Nor can God's Teacher be heard 
at all except by those who realize that harm can actually achieve 
nothing. 
No gain can come from 32 it. 


M 5 E 2. 
Therefore God's teachers are wholly gentle. 
They need the 
strength of gentleness, for it is in this that the function of salvation 
becomes easy. 
To those who would do harm it is impossible. 
To 
those to whom harm has no meaning it is merely natural. 
What 
choice but this has meaning to the sane? Who chooses hell when he 
perceives a way to Heaven? And who would choose the weakness 
that must come from harm in place of the unfailing, all- 
encompassing and limitless strength of gentleness? The might of 
God's teachers lies in their gentleness, for they have understood 
their evil thoughts came neither from God's Son nor his Creator. 

Thus did they join their thoughts with Him Who is their Source. 

And so their will, which always was His Own, is free to be itself. 

M(14) 


31 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “the” to “a” which change reflects the Notes. 


32 FIP changes “from” to “of’ but the Notes and the Urtext manuscript clearly have “from.” 


1671 


III-13 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


F. 
Joy 


M 5 F l. 
Joy is the inevitable result of gentleness. 
Gentleness means 
that fear is now impossible, and what could come to interfere with 
joy? The open hands of gentleness are always filled. 
The gentle 
have no pain. 
They cannot suffer. 
Why would they not be joyous? 
They are sure they are beloved and must be safe. 
Joy goes with 
gentleness as surely as grief attends attack. 
God's teachers trust in 
Him. 
And they are sure His Teacher goes before them, making sure 
no harm can come to them. 
They hold His gifts and follow in His 
way, because God's Voice directs them in all things. 
Joy is their 
song of thanks. 
And Christ looks down on them in thanks as well. 

His need of them is just as great as theirs of Him. 
How joyous it is 
to share the purpose of salvation. 


G. 
Defenselessness 

M 5 G l. 
God's teachers have learned how to be simple. 
They have 
no dreams that need defense against the truth. 
33 They do not try to 
make themselves. 
Their joy comes from their understanding Who 
created them. 
And does what God created need defense? No-one 
can become an advanced teacher of God until he fully understands 
that defenses are but the 34 foolish guardians of mad illusions. 
The 
more grotesque the dream, the fiercer and more powerful its 
defenses seem to be. 
Yet when the teacher of God finally agrees to 
look past them, he finds 35 nothing was there. 
Slowly at first he lets 
himself be undeceived. 
But he learns faster as his trust increases. 
It 
is not danger that comes when defenses are laid down. 
It is safety. 

It is peace. 
It is joy. 
And it is God. 
M(l5) 

FI. 
Generosity 

M 5 H l. 
The term generosity has special meaning to the teacher of 
God. 
It is not the usual meaning of the word; in fact, it is a meaning 
that must be learned and learned very carefully. 
Like all the other 

33 Urtext manuscript has “trust” crossed out and “truth” penciled in. 
The Notes and FIP both have 
“truth.” 

34 FIP omits “the” but the Notes retains it. 


35 FIP adds “that” which is not present in the Notes. 



III-14 


1672 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


attributes of God's teachers this one rests ultimately on trust, for 
without trust no-one can be generous in the true sense. 
To the 
world, generosity means "giving away" in the sense of "giving up." 
To the teachers of God, it means "giving away" in order to keep. 


This has been emphasized throughout the text and the workbook, 
but it is perhaps more alien to the thinking of the world than many 
other ideas in our curriculum. 
Its greater strangeness lies merely in 
the obviousness of its reversal of the world's thinking. 
In the 
clearest way possible and at the simplest of levels, the word means 
the exact opposite to the teachers of God and to the world. 


M5H2. 
The teacher of God is generous out of Self-interest . 
36 This 
does not refer, however, to the self the world speaks of . 
37 The 
teacher of God does not want anything he cannot give away, 
because he realizes it would be valueless to him by definition. 
What 
would he want it for? He could only lose because of it. 
He could 
not gain. 
Therefore he does not seek what only he could keep, 
because that is a guarantee of loss. 
He does not want to suffer. 
Why 
should he ensure himself pain? But he does want to keep for 
himself all things that are of God, and therefore for His Son. 
These 
are the things that belong to him. 
These he can give away in true 
generosity, protecting them forever for himself. 
M(16) 

I. 
Patience 

M 511. 
Those who are certain of the outcome can afford to wait, and 
wait without anxiety. 
Patience is natural to the teacher of God. 
All 
he sees is certain outcome, at a time perhaps unknown 38 as yet, but 
not in doubt. 
The time will be as right as is the answer. 
And this is 
true for everything that happens now or in the future. 
The past as 
well held no mistakes; nothing that did not serve to benefit the 
world as well as him to whom it seemed to happen. 
Perhaps it was 


36 Urtext manuscript does not capitalize “Self’ here, but FIP does and we agree it should be capitalized. 

It is not clear from the Notes whether this was originally capitalized or not. 


37 FIP changes this to “to the self of which the world speaks” which is arguably better grammar. 

However, the Notes has it as it stands. 


38 FIP inserts “to him” but that is not present in the Notes. 



1673 


III-15 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


not understood at the time. 
Even so, the teacher of God is willing to 
reconsider all his past decisions, if they are causing pain to anyone. 

Patience is natural to those who trust. 
Sure of the ultimate 
interpretation of all things in time, no outcome already seen or yet 
to come can cause them fear. 


J. 
Faithfulness 

M 5 J l. 
The extent of the teacher of God's faithfulness is the measure 
of his advancement in the curriculum. 
Does he still select some 
aspects of his life to bring to his learning, while keeping others 
apart? If so, his advancement is limited and his trust not yet firmly 
established. 
Faithfulness is the teacher of God's trust in the Word of 
God to set all things right; not some, but all. 
Generally, his 
faithfulness begins by resting on just some problems, remaining 
carefully limited for a time. 
To give up all problems to one Answer 
is to reverse the thinking of the world entirely. 
And that alone is 
faithfulness. 
Nothing but that really deserves the name. 
Yet each 
degree, however small, is worth achieving. 
Readiness, as the text 
notes, is not mastery. 


M 5 J 2. 
True faithfulness, however, does not deviate. 
Being 
consistent it is wholly honest. 
Being unswerving it is full of trust. 

Being based on fearlessness it is gentle. 
Being certain it is joyous, 
and being confident it is tolerant. 
Defenselessness attends it 
naturally, and joy is its condition . 
39 Faithfulness, then, combines in 
itself the other attributes of God's teachers. 
It implies acceptance of 
the Word of God and His definition of His Son. 
It is to Them M(l7) 
that faithfulness in the true sense is always directed. 
Toward Them 
it looks, seeking until it finds . 
40 And having found, it rests in quiet 
certainty on That alone to which all faithfulness is due. 



39 FIP moves this whole sentence forward by four sentences, beginning after “finds.” and before “And 
having” but in the Notes it is the same as it appears here. 


40 Matthew 7:7-8 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be 
opened to you. 
For everyone who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it will 
be opened.” 


III-16 


1674 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


K. 
Open-Mindedness 

M 5 K l. 
The centrality of open-mindedness, perhaps the last of the 
attributes the teacher of God acquires, is easily understood when its 
relation to forgiveness is recognized. 
Open-mindedness comes with 
lack of judgment. 
As judgment shuts the mind against God's 
Teacher, so open-mindedness invites Him to come in. 
As 
condemnation judges the Son of God as evil, so open-mindedness 
permits him to be judged by the Voice for God on His behalf. 
As the 
projection of guilt upon him would send him to hell, so open- 
mindedness lets Christ's image be projected on 41 him. 
Only the 
open-minded can be at peace, for they alone see reason for it. 


M 5 K 2. 
How do the open-minded forgive? They have let go all 
things that would prevent forgiveness. 
They have in truth 
abandoned the world, and let it be restored to them in newness and 
in joy so glorious they never could 42 have conceived of such a 
change. 
Nothing is now as it was formerly. 
Nothing but sparkles 
now which seemed so dull and lifeless before. 
And above all are all 
things welcoming, for threat has 43 gone. 
No clouds remain to hide 
the Face of Christ. 
Now is the goal achieved. 
Forgiveness is the 
final goal of the curriculum. 
It paves the way for what goes far 
beyond all learning. 
The curriculum makes no effort to exceed its 
legitimate goal. 
Forgiveness is its single aim, at which all learning 
ultimately converges. 
It is indeed enough. 


M 5 K 3. 
You may have noticed that the list of attributes of God's 
teachers does not include those things which are the Son of God's 
inheritance. 
Terms like love, sinlessness, perfection, knowledge, 
and eternal truth do not appear in this context. 
They would be most 
inappropriate here. 
What God has given is so far M(18) beyond our 
curriculum that learning but disappears in its presence. 
Yet while 


41 FIP changes “projected on” to “extended to” but the Notes has “projected on.” The distinction 
between “projection” (of the ego) and “extension” (more divine) which the later editing makes is 
frequently not made in the original dictation which uses “project” interchangeably with “extend” in a 
number of instances to refer to a divine and loving projection. 


42 FIP changes “never could” to “could never.” The Notes has “never could.” 

43 FIP changes “has gone” to “is gone” but the Notes clearly has “has gone.” 


1675 


III-17 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


its presence is obscured, the focus properly belongs on the 
curriculum. 
It is the function of God's teachers to bring true 
learning to the world. 
Properly speaking, it is unlearning that they 
bring, for that is "true learning" in the world. 
It is given to the 
teachers of God to bring the glad tidings 44 of complete forgiveness 
to the world. 
Blessed indeed are they, for they are the Bringers of 
salvation. 
45 

6. 
How Is Healing Accomplished? 

A. 
Introduction 

M 6 A 1 . 
Healing involves an understanding of what the illusion of 
sickness is for. 
Healing is impossible without this. 


B. 
The perceived purpose of sickness 

M 6 B 1 . 
Healing is accomplished the instant the sufferer no longer 
sees any value in pain. 
Who would choose suffering unless he 
thought it brought him something, and something of value to him? 
He must think it is a small price to pay for something of greater 
worth. 
For sickness is an election; a decision. 
It is the choice of 
weakness, in the mistaken conviction that it is strength. 
When this 
occurs, real strength is seen as threat and health as danger. 
Sickness 
is a method, conceived in madness, for placing God's Son on his 
Father's throne. 
God is seen as outside, fierce and powerful, eager 
to keep all power for Himself. 
Only by his death can He be 
conquered by His Son. 


M 6 B 2. 
And what, in this insane conviction, does healing stand for? 
It symbolizes the defeat of God's Son and the triumph of his Father 
over him. 
It represents the ultimate defiance in a direct form which 
the Son of God is forced to recognize. 
It stands for all that he would 


44 Luke 1:19 And the angel answered and said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of 
God, and was sent to speak to you and bring you these glad tidings.” Luke 8:1 Now it came to pass, 
afterward, that He went through every city and village, preaching and bringing the glad tidings of the 
kingdom of God. 


45 Isaiah 45:8 Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness: let the 
earth open, that they may bring forth salvation, and let her cause righteousness to spring up together; I 
the LORD have created it. 



III-18 


1676 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


hide from himself to protect his life. 
If he is healed, he is responsible 
for his thoughts. 
And if he is responsible for his thoughts he will be 
killed, to prove to him how weak and pitiful he is. 
But if he chooses 
death himself, his weakness is his strength. 
Now has he given 
himself what God would give to him, and thus entirely usurped the 
throne of his Creator. 
M(l9) 

C. 
The shift in perception 

M 6 C 1 . 
Healing must occur in exact proportion in 46 which the 
valuelessness of sickness is recognized. 
One need but say, "There is 
no gain at all to me in this," and he is healed. 
But to say this one 
must first recognize certain facts. 
First, it is obvious that decisions 
are of the mind, not of the body. 
If sickness is but a faulty problem¬ 
solving approach, it is a decision. 
And if it is a decision, it is the 
mind and not the body that makes it. 
The resistance to recognizing 
this is enormous, because the existence of the world as we 47 perceive 
it depends on the body being the decision-maker. 
Terms like 
"instincts," "reflexes" and the like represent attempts to endow the 
body with non-mental motivators. 
Actually, such terms merely 
state or describe the problem. 
They do not answer it. 


M 6 C 2. 
The acceptance of sickness as a decision of the mind, for a 
purpose for which it would use the body, is the basis of healing. 


And this is so for healing in all forms. 
A patient decides that this is 
so, and he recovers. 
If he decides against recovery he will not be 
healed. 
Who is the physician? Only the mind of the patient himself. 

The outcome is what he decides that it is. 
Special agents seem to be 
ministering to him, yet they but give form to his own choice. 
He 
chooses them 48 to bring tangible form to his desires. 
And it is this 
they do, and nothing else. 
They are not actually needed at all. 
The 
patient could merely rise up without their aid and say, "I have no 
use for this." There is no form of sickness that would not be cured at 
once. 



46 FIP replaces the manuscript “in” with “to”, but the Notes has “in.” 

47 FIP changes “we” to “you” but in the Notes the glyph for “we” is used. 


48 FIP inserts “in order” which is not present in the Notes. 



1677 


III-19 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 6 C 3. 
What is the single requisite for this shift in perception? It is 
simply this; the recognition that sickness is of the mind, and has 
nothing to do with the body. 
What does this recognition "cost"? It 
costs the world 49 we see, for the world will never again appear to 
rule the mind. 
For with this recognition is responsibility placed 
where it belongs; not with the world, but on him who looks on the 
world and sees it as it is not. 
He looks on what he chooses to see. 


No more and no less. 
The world does nothing to him. 
M(20) He only 
thought it did. 
Nor does he do anything to the world, because he 
was mistaken about what it was. 
50 Herein is the release from guilt 
and sickness both, for they are one. 
Yet to accept this release, the 
insignificance of the body must be an acceptable idea. 


M 6 C 4. 
With this idea is pain forever gone. 
But with this idea goes 
also all confusion about creation. 
Does not this follow of necessity? 
Place cause and effect in their true sequence in one respect, and the 
learning will generalize and transform the world. 
The transfer 
value of one true idea has no end nor 51 limit. 
The final outcome of 
this lesson is the remembrance of God. 
What do guilt and sickness, 
pain, disaster and all suffering mean now? Having no purpose, they 
are gone. 
And with them also go 52 all the effects they seemed to 
cause. 
Cause and effect but replicate creation. 
Seen in their proper 
perspective, without distortion and without fear, they re-establish 
Heaven. 


D. 
The function of the Teacher of God 

M 6 D 1 . 
If the patient must change his mind in order to be healed, 
what does the teacher of God do? Can he change the patient's mind 
for him? Certainly not. 
For those already willing to change their 
mind he has no function except to rejoice with them, for they have 


49 FIP changes “world we see” to “whole world you see” but in the Notes the glyph for “we” is used. 


50 FIP changes “was” to “is” but in the Notes it is “was.” 

51 FIP changes “nor” to “or” but in the Notes it is “nor.” 

52 Urtext manuscript has “goes” which appears to be a grammar error, disagreement in number. 
In the 
Notes , it was originally written “and with ??? (illegible crossed out characters)” followed by them. 

Possibly it was originally a singular noun making “goes” the correct form. 
However, with a plural noun 
“them,” it needs to be “go.” FIP also has “go.” 


III-20 


1678 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


become teachers of God with him. 
He has, however, a more specific 
function for those who do not understand what healing is. 
These 
patients do not realize they have chosen sickness. 
On the contrary, 
they believe that sickness has chosen them. 
Nor are they open- 
minded on this point. 
The body tells them what to do and they 
obey. 
They have no idea how insane this concept is. 
If they even 
suspected it they would be healed. 
Yet they suspect nothing. 
To 
them the separation is quite real. 
M(2l) 

M 6 D 2. 
To them God's teachers come to represent another choice 
which they had forgotten. 
The simple presence of a teacher of God 53 
is a reminder. 
Their 54 thoughts ask for the right to question what 
the patient has accepted is true. 
As God's messengers, they 55 are the 
symbols of salvation. 
They ask the patient for forgiveness for God's 
Son in his own Name. 
They stand for the Alternative. 
With God's 
Word in their minds they come in benediction, not to heal the sick 
but to remind them of the remedy God has already given them. 
It is 
not their hands that heal. 
It is not their voice that speaks the Word 
of God. 
They merely give what has been given them. 
Very gently 
they call to their brothers to turn away from death. 
Behold, you Son 
of God, what life can offer you. 
Would you choose sickness in place 
of this? 

M 6 D 3. 
Not once do the advanced teachers of God consider the 
forms of sickness in which their brother believes. 
To do this is to 
forget that all of them have the same purpose and therefore are not 
really different. 
They seek for God's Voice in this brother who 
would so deceive himself as to believe God's Son can suffer. 
And 
they remind him that he has not made 56 himself, and must remain as 
God created him. 
They recognize illusions can have no effect. 
The 


53 Both FIP and the manuscript have this as “a teacher of God” but in the manuscript that is crossed out 
and replaced with “God’s Teachers.” The subsequent pronoun (His vs. 
Their) is treated likewise. 
In 
the Notes it is ‘Their simple presence is” but then “a Teacher of God” is written in between the lines. 


54 Urtext manuscript has “Their” in brackets just before “His.” The Notes has “Their.” 

55 Both FIP and the manuscript have “His Teachers” but again, that is crossed out in the manuscript and 
replaced with “they.” The Notes has “they.” 

56 FIP changes “has not made” to “did not make.” The Notes has “has not made.” 


1679 


III-21 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


truth in their minds reaches out to the truth in the minds of their 
brothers, so that illusions are not reinforced. 
They are thus brought 
to truth, and truth is not brought to them. 
So are they dispelled, not 
by the will of another, but by the union of the One Will with Itself. 

And this is the function of God's teachers; to see no will as separate 
from their own, nor theirs as separate from God's. 
M(22) 

7. 
Is Healing Certain? 

M 7 A l. 
Healing is always certain. 
It is impossible to let illusions be 
brought to truth and keep the illusions. 
Truth demonstrates 
illusions have no value. 
The teacher of God has seen the correction 
of his errors in the mind of the patient, recognizing it for what it is. 

Having accepted the Atonement for himself, he has also accepted it 
for the patient. 
Yet what if the patient uses sickness as a way of life, 
believing healing is the way to death? When this is so, a sudden 
healing may 57 precipitate intense depression, and a sense of loss so 
deep that the patient may even try to destroy himself. 
Having 
nothing to live for, he may ask for death. 
Healing must wait, for his 
protection. 


M 7 A 2. 
Healing will always stand aside when 58 it would be seen as 
threat. 
The instant it is welcome it is there. 
Where healing has been 
given it will be received. 
And what is time before the gifts of God? 
We have referred many times in the text to the storehouse of 
treasures laid up equally for the giver and the receiver of God's 
gifts. 
Not one is lost, for they can but increase. 
No teacher of God 
should feel disappointed if he has offered healing and it does not 
appear to have been received. 
It is not up to him to judge when his 
gift should be accepted. 
Let him be certain it has been received, and 
trust that it will be accepted when it is recognized as a blessing and 
not a curse. 



57 FIP changes “may” to “might.” The Notes has “may.” 

58 Both FIP and the manuscript have “when” instead of “where” but it is crossed out in the manuscript 
and “where” is written in. 
The Notes has “when.” 


III-22 


1680 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 7 A 3. 
It is not the function of God's teachers to evaluate the 
outcome of their gifts. 
It is merely their function to give them. 
Once 
they have done that, they have also given the outcome, for that is 
part of the gift. 
No-one can give if he is concerned with the result of 
the 59 giving. 
That is a limitation on the giving itself, and neither the 
giver nor the receiver would have the gift. 
Trust is an essential part 
of giving; in fact, it is the part that makes sharing possible, the part 
that guarantees the giver will not lose, but only gain. 
Who gives a 
gift, and then remains with it, to be sure it is used as the giver deems 
appropriate? Such is not giving but imprisoning. 
M(23) 

M 7 A 4. 
It is the relinquishing of all concern about the gift that makes 
it truly given. 
And it is trust that makes true giving possible. 

Healing is the change of mind that the Holy Spirit in the patient's 
mind is seeking for him. 
And it is the Holy Spirit in the mind of the 
giver Who gives the gift to him. 
How can it be lost? How can it be 
ineffectual? How can it be wasted? God's treasure house can never 
be empty. 
And if one gift were 60 missing it would not be full. 
Yet is 
its fullness guaranteed by God. 
What concern, then, can a teacher of 
God have about what becomes of his gifts? Given by God to God, 
who in this holy exchange can receive less than everything? 

8. 
Should Healing Be Repeated? 

M 8 A 1 . 
This question really answers itself. 
Healing cannot be 
repeated. 
If the patient is healed, what remains to heal him from? 
And if the healing is certain, as we have already said it is, what is 
there to repeat? For a teacher of God to remain concerned about the 
result of healing is to limit the healing. 
It is now the teacher of God 
himself whose mind needs to be healed. 
And it is this he must 
facilitate. 
He is now the patient, and he must so regard himself. 
He 
has made a mistake, and must be willing to change his mind about 
it. 
He lacked the trust that makes for giving truly, and so he has not 
received the benefit of his gift. 



59 Handwritten mark-up and FIP omit “the” however it is present in the Notes. 


60 FIP changes “were” to “is” but the Notes has “were.” 


1681 


III-23 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 8 A 2. 
Whenever a teacher of God has tried to be a channel for 
healing he has succeeded. 
Should he be tempted to doubt this, he 
should not repeat his previous effort. 
That was already maximal, 
because the Holy Spirit so accepted it and so used it. 
Now the 
teacher of God has only one course to follow. 
He must use his 
reason to tell himself that he has given the problem to One Who 
cannot fail, and 61 recognize that his own uncertainty is not love but 
fear, and therefore hate. 
His position has thus become untenable, 
for he is offering M(24) hate to one to whom he offered love. 
This is 
impossible. 
Having offered love, only love can be received. 


M 8 A 3. 
It is in this that the teacher of God must trust. 
This is what 
is really meant by the statement that the one responsibility of the 
miracle worker is to accept the Atonement for himself. 
The teacher 
of God is a miracle worker because he gives the gifts he has 
received. 
Yet he must first accept them. 
He need do no more, nor is 
there more that he could do. 
By accepting healing he can give it. 
If 
he doubts this, let him remember Who gave the gift and Who 
received it. 
Thus is his doubt corrected. 
He thought the gifts of God 
could be withdrawn. 
That was a mistake, but hardly one to stay 
with. 
And so the teacher of God can only recognize it for what it is, 
and let it be corrected for him. 


M 8 A 4. 
One of the more 62 difficult temptations to recognize is that 
to doubt a healing because of the appearance of continuing 
symptoms is a mistake in the form of lack of trust. 
As such, it is an 
attack. 
Usually it seems to be just the opposite. 
It does appear 
unreasonable at first to be told that continued concern is attack. 
It 
has all the appearance 63 of love. 
Yet love without trust is 
impossible, and doubt and trust cannot coexist. 
And hate must be 
the opposite of love, regardless of the form it takes. 
Doubt not the 
gift, and it is impossible to doubt its result. 
This is the certainty that 


61 FIP inserts “must” before “recognize” but that is not present in the Notes. 


62 FIP changes “more” to “most” but the Notes has “more.” 

63 FIP changes “appearance” to “appearances” but the Notes has “appearance.” 


III-24 


1682 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


gives God's teachers the power to be miracle workers, for they have 
put their trust in Him. 


M 8 A 5. 
The real basis for doubt about the outcome of any problem 
that has been given to God's Teacher for resolution is always self¬ 
doubt. 
And that necessarily implies that trust has been placed in an 
illusory self, for only such a self can be doubted. 
This illusion can 
take many forms. 
Perhaps there is a fear of weakness and 
vulnerability. 
Perhaps there is 64 fear of failure and shame associated 
with a sense of inadequacy. 
Perhaps there is a guilty M(25) 
embarrassment stemming from false humility. 
The form of the 
mistake is not important. 
What is important is only the recognition 
of a mistake as a mistake. 


M 8 A 6. 
The mistake is always some form of concern with the self to 
the exclusion of the patient. 
It is a failure to recognize him as part of 
the self, and thus represents a confusion in identity. 
Conflict about 
what you are has entered your mind, and you have become 
deceived about yourself. 
And you are deceived about yourself 
because you have denied the Source of your creation. 
If you are 
offering only healing, you cannot doubt. 
If you really want the 
problem solved, you cannot doubt. 
If you are certain what the 
problem is, you cannot doubt. 
Doubt is the result of conflicting 
wishes. 
Be sure of what you want, and doubt becomes impossible. 


9. 
How Can the Perception of Order of Difficulties Be 
Avoided? 

M 9 A 1 . 
The belief in order of difficulties is the basis for the world's 
perception. 
It rests on differences; on uneven background and 
shifting foreground, on unequal heights and diverse sizes, on 
varying degrees of darkness and light, and thousands of contrasts in 
which each thing seen competes with every other in order to be 
recognized. 
A larger object overshadows a smaller one. 
A brighter 
thing draws the attention from another with less intensity of appeal. 

And a more threatening idea, or one conceived of as more desirable 


64 FIP inserts “a” before “fear.” There is no “a” in the Notes. 



1683 


III-25 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


by the world's standards, completely upsets the mental balance. 

What the body's eyes behold is only conflict. 
Look not to them for 
peace and understanding. 


M 9 A 2. 
Illusions are always illusions of differences. 
How could it 
be otherwise? By definition, an illusion is an attempt to make 
something real that is regarded as of major importance, but is 
recognized as being untrue. 
The mind therefore seeks to make it 
true out of its intensity of desire to have it for itself. 
M(26) Illusions 
are travesties of creation; attempts to bring truth to lies. 
Finding 
truth unacceptable, the mind revolts against truth and gives itself an 
illusion of victory. 
Finding health a burden, it retreats into feverish 
dreams. 
And in these dreams the mind is separate, different from 
other minds, with different interests of its own, and able to gratify 
its needs at the expense of others. 


M 9 A 3. 
Where do all these differences come from? Certainly they 
seem to be in the world outside. 
Yet it is surely the mind that judges 
what the eyes behold. 
It is the mind that interprets the eyes' 
messages and gives them "meaning." And this meaning does not 
exist in the world outside at all. 
What is seen as "reality" is simply 
what the mind prefers. 
Its hierarchy of values is projected outward, 
and it sends the body's eyes to find it. 
The body's eyes will never 
see except through differences. 
Yet it is not the messages they bring 
on which perception rests. 
Only the mind evaluates their messages, 
so 65 only the mind is responsible for seeing. 
It alone decides 
whether what is seen is real or illusory, desirable or undesirable, 
pleasurable or painful. 


M 9 A 4. 
It is in the sorting out and categorizing activities of the mind 
that errors in perception enter. 
And it is here correction must be 
made. 
The mind classifies what the body's eyes bring to it 
according to its preconceived values, judging where each sense 
datum fits best. 
What basis could be faultier than this? 
Unrecognized by itself, it has itself asked to be given what will fit 


65 Handwritten mark-up and FIP add “and” before “so” but that is not present in the Notes. 



III-26 


1684 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


into these categories. 
And having done so, it concludes that the 
categories must be true. 
On this the judgment of all differences 
rests, because it is on this that judgments of the world depend. 
Can 
this confused and senseless "reasoning" be depended on for 
anything? 

M 9 A 5. 
There can be no order of difficulty in healing merely 
because all sickness is illusion. 
Is it harder to dispel the belief of the 
insane in a larger hallucination as opposed to a smaller one? Will he 
agree more quickly to the unreality of a louder voice he hears than 
to that of a softer one? Will he dismiss more easily a whispered 
demand to kill than a shout? And do the number of pitchforks the 
devils he sees carrying affect their credibility in his perception? His 
mind has categorized M(27) them 66 as real, and so they are 67 real to 
him. 
When he realizes they are all illusions they will disappear. 


And so it is with healing. 
The properties of illusions which seem to 
make them different are really irrelevant, for their properties are as 
illusory as they are. 


M 9 A 6. 
The body's eyes will continue to see differences, 68 but the 
mind which 69 has let itself be healed will no longer acknowledge 
them. 
There will be those who seem to be "sicker" than others, and 
the body's eyes will report their changed appearances as before. 
But 
the 70 mind will put them all in one category 71 - they are unreal. 


This is the gift of its Teacher; the understanding that only two 
categories are meaningful in sorting out the messages the mind 
receives from what appears to be the outside world. 
And of these 
two but one is real. 
Just as reality is wholly real, apart from size and 
shape and time and place, for differences cannot exist within it, so 


66 Handwritten mark-up and FIP add “all” but that is not present in the Notes. 


67 Handwritten mark-up and FIP add “all” but that is not present in the Notes. 


68 The Urtext manuscript has a sentence break typed here, which FIP restores; handwritten mark-up 
corrects this to a comma which is the reading in the Notes. 


69 FIP changes “which” to “that.” The Notes has “which.” 

70 FIP changes “the mind” to “the healed mind.” The Notes has “the mind.” 

71 The Urtext manuscript has “, -” here, FIP uses a semicolon. 
The Notes has an “=” sign glyph which 
commonly is used to signify an em-dash. 



1685 


III-27 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


too are illusions without distinctions. 
72 The one answer to sickness 
of any kind is healing. 
The one answer to all illusions is truth. 


10. 
Are Changes Required In the Life Situations of God's 
Teachers? 

M10 A l. 
Changes are required in the minds of God's teachers. 
This 
may or may not involve changes in the external situation. 


Remember that no-one is where he is by accident, and chance plays 
no part in God's plan. 
It is most unlikely that changes in his 
attitudes would not be the first step in the newly-made teacher of 
God's training. 
There is, however, no set pattern, since training is 
always highly individualized. 
There are those who are called upon 
to change their life situation almost immediately, but these are 
generally special cases. 
By far the majority are given a slowly- 
evolving training program, in which as many previous mistakes as 
possible are corrected. 
Relationships in particular must be properly 
perceived, and all dark cornerstones of unforgiveness removed. 

Otherwise the old thought-system still has a basis for return. 
M(28) 

M 10 A 2. 
As the teacher of God advances in his training, he learns 
one lesson with increasing thoroughness. 
He does not make his 
own decisions; he asks his Teacher for His answer, and it is this he 
follows as his guide for action. 
This becomes easier and easier, as 
the teacher of God learns to give up his own judgment. 
The giving 
up of judgment, the obvious prerequisite for hearing God's Voice, is 
usually a fairly slow process, not because it is difficult, but because 
it is apt to be perceived as personally insulting. 
The world's training 
is directed toward achieving a goal in direct opposition to that of 
our curriculum. 
The world trains for reliance on one's judgment as 
the criterion for maturity and strength. 
Our curriculum trains for 
the relinquishment of judgment as the necessary condition of 
salvation. 



72 Urtext manuscript is singular, “distinction,” Handwritten mark-up and FIP pluralize this. 
The Notes 
also pluralizes it. 



III-28 


1686 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


11. 
Howls Judgment Relinquished? 

M ll A l. 
Judgment, like other devices by which the world of 
illusions is maintained, is totally misunderstood by the world. 
It is 
actually confused with wisdom, and substitutes for truth. 
As the 
world uses the term, an individual is capable of "good" and "bad" 
judgment, and his education aims at strengthening the former and 
minimizing the latter. 
There is, however, considerable confusion 
about what these categories mean. 
What is "good" judgment to one 
is "bad" judgment to another. 
Further, even the same person 
classifies the same action as showing "good" judgment at one time 
and "bad" judgment at another time. 
Nor can any consistent criteria 
for determining what these categories are be really taught. 
At any 
time the student may disagree with what his would-be teacher says 
about it, and the teacher himself is inconsistent in what he believes 
they are. 
73 M(29) 

M 11A 2. 
"Good judgment" in these terms, does not mean anything. 

No more does "bad." It is necessary for the teacher of God to realize 
not that he should not judge, but that he cannot. 
In giving up 
judgment he merely gives up what he did not have. 
He gives up an 
illusion; or better, he has an illusion of giving up. 
He has actually 
merely become more honest. 
Recognizing that judgment was 
always impossible for him, he no longer attempts it. 
This is no 
sacrifice. 
On the contrary, he puts himself in a position where 
judgment through him rather than by him can occur. 
And this 
Judgment is neither "good" nor "bad." It is the only Judgment there 
is, and it is only one: "God's Son is guiltless, and sin does not exist." 

M 11A 3. 
The aim of our curriculum, unlike the goal of the world's 
learning, is the recognition that judgment in the usual sense is 


73 This sentence is heavily marked-up in the Urtext manuscript. 
The last words “they are” are 
handwritten in. 
FIP modifies this sentence to: “At any time the student may disagree with what his 
would-be teacher says about them, and the teacher himself may well be inconsistent in what he 
believes.'’'’ The Notes reads slightly differently “At any time the student may disagree with what his 
would-be teacher says about it, and the teacher himself is inconsistent in what he believes.’’'’ The Notes 
was originally written “about what he believes’’’ but “about” was crossed out, and “in” written above the 


line. 



1687 


III-29 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


impossible. 
This is not an opinion but a fact. 
In order to judge 
anything rightly, 74 one would have to be fully aware of an 
inconceivably wide range of things; past, present and to come. 
One 
would have to recognize in advance all the effects of his judgments 
on everyone and everything involved in them in any way. 
And one 
would have to be certain there is no distortion in his perception, so 
that his judgment would be wholly fair to everyone on whom it 
rests now and in the future. 
Who is in a position to do this? Who 
except in grandiose fantasies would claim this for himself? 

M 11A 4. 
Remember how many times you thought you knew all the 
"facts" you needed for judgment, and how wrong you were! Is 
there anyone who has not had this experience? Would you know 
how many times you merely thought you were right, without ever 
realizing you were wrong? Why would you choose such an 
arbitrary basis for decision-making? Wisdom is not judgment; it is 
the relinquishment of judgment. 
Make then but one more 
judgment. 
It is this; there is Someone with you Whose judgment is 
perfect. 
He does know all the facts, past, present and to come. 
He 
does know all the effects of His judgment on everyone and 
everything involved in any way. 
And He is wholly fair to everyone, 
for there is no distortion in His perception. 
M(30) 

M 11A 5. 
Therefore lay judgment down, not with regret but with a 
sigh of gratitude. 
Now are you free of a burden so great that you 
could merely stagger and fall down beneath it. 
And it was all 
illusion. 
Nothing more. 
Now can the teacher of God rise up 
unburdened, and walk lightly on. 
Yet it is not only this that is his 
benefit. 
His sense of care is gone, for he has none. 
He has given it 
away, along with judgment. 
He gave himself to Him Whose 
judgment he has chosen now to trust instead of his own. 
Now he 
makes no mistakes. 
His Guide is sure. 
And where he came to judge 
he comes to bless. 
Where now he laughs he used to come to weep. 



74 John 7:24 “Do not judge according to appearance, but judge with righteous judgment.” 


III-30 


1688 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 11A 6. 
It is not difficult to relinquish judgment. 
But it is difficult 
indeed to try to keep it. 
The teacher of God lays it down happily the 
instant he recognizes its cost. 
All of the ugliness he sees 75 about him 
is its outcome. 
All of the pain he looks upon is its result. 
All of the 
loneliness and sense of loss; of passing time and growing 
hopelessness; of sickening despair and fear of death; all these have 
come of it. 
And now he knows that these things need not be. 
Not 
one is true. 
For he has given up their cause, and they, which never 
were but the effects of his mistaken choice, have fallen from him. 

Teacher of God, this step will bring you peace. 
Can it be difficult to 
want but this? 

12. 
Howls Peace Possible In This World? 

M12 A l. 
This is a question everyone must ask. 
Certainly peace 
seems to be impossible here. 
76 Yet the Word of God promises other 
things that seem impossible, as well as this. 
His Word has promised 
peace. 
It has also promised that there is no death; that resurrection 
must occur, and that rebirth is man's inheritance. 
The world you see 
cannot be the world God loves, and yet His Word assures us that He 
loves the world. 
God's Word has promised us 77 that peace is 
possible here, and what He promises can hardly be impossible. 
But 
it is true that the world must be looked at differently, if His 
promises are to be accepted. 
What the world is, is but a fact. 
You 
cannot choose what this should be. 
But you can choose how you 
would see it. 
Indeed, you must choose this. 
M(3l) 

M 12 A 2. 
Again we come to the question of judgment. 
This time, ask 
yourself whether your judgment or the Word of God is more likely 
to be true. 
For they say different things about the world, and things 
so opposite that it is pointless to try to 78 reconcile them. 
God offers 


75 Mark-up shifts the next two sentences to past tense. 
FIP does not preserve that, nor do we. 
The 
Notes has this reading in its mark-up, but something else which I can’t make out was written first, and 
crossed out. 


76 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “here” which is also found in the Notes. 


77 Handwritten mark-up and FIP omit “us” but that word is present in the Notes. 


78 The Urtext manuscript has “try to” inserted as handwritten mark-up as does FIP. 
It is also present in 
the Notes. 



1689 


III-31 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


the world salvation; your judgment would condemn it. 
God says 
there is no death; your judgment sees but death as the inevitable end 
of life. 
God's Word assures you that He loves the world; your 
judgment says it is unlovable. 
Who is right? For one of you is 
wrong. 
It must be so. 


M12 A 3. 
The text explains that the Holy Spirit is the Answer to all 
problems you have made. 
These problems are not true, 79 but that is 
meaningless to those who believe in them. 
And everyone believes 
in what he made, for it was made by his believing it. 
Into this 
strange and paradoxical situation, - one without meaning and 
devoid of sense, yet out of which no way seems possible, - God has 
sent His Judgment to answer yours. 
Gently His Judgment 
substitutes for yours. 
And through this substitution is the 
ununderstandable made understandable. 
How is peace possible in 
this world? In your judgment it is not possible, and can never be 
possible. 
But in the Judgment of God what is reflected here is only 
peace. 


M12 A 4. 
Peace is impossible to those who look on war. 
Peace is 
inevitable to those who offer peace. 
How easily, then, is your 
judgment of the world escaped. 
It is not the world which makes 
peace seem impossible. 
It is the world you see that is impossible. 


Yet has God's Judgment on this distorted world redeemed it and 
made it fit to welcome peace. 
And peace descends on it in joyous 
answer. 
Peace now belongs here, because a Thought of God has 
entered. 
What else but a Thought of God turns hell to Heaven 
merely by being what It is? The earth bows down before Its 
gracious Presence, and It leans down in answer to raise it up again. 

Now is the question different. 
It is no longer, "Can peace be 
possible in this world?" but instead, "Is it not impossible that peace 
be absent here?" M(32) 


79 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “true” with “real” but the Notes reads “true.” 


III-32 


1690 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


13. 
How Many Teachers of God Are Needed to Save the 
World? 

M 13 A l. 
The 80 answer to this question is "one". 
One wholly perfect 
teacher, whose learning is complete, suffices. 
This One, sanctified 
and redeemed, becomes the Self Who is the Son of God. 
He Who 
was always wholly spirit now no longer sees Himself as a body, or 
even as in a body. 
Therefore He is limitless. 
And being limitless. 

His Thoughts are joined with God's forever and ever. 
His 
perception of Himself is based upon God's Judgment, not His Own. 

Thus does He share God's Will, and bring His Thoughts to still 
deluded minds. 
He is forever One, because He is as God created 
Him. 
He has accepted Christ and He is saved. 
81 

M13 A 2. 
Thus does the son of man become the Son of God. 
82 It is 
not really a change; it is a change of mind. 
Nothing external alters, 
but everything internal now reflects only the Love of God. 
God can 
no longer be feared, for the mind sees no cause for punishment. 

God's teachers appear to be many, for that is the world's need. 
Yet 
being joined in one purpose, and one they share with God, how 
could they be separate from each other? What does it matter if they 
then appear in many forms? Their minds are one; their joining is 
complete. 
And God works through them now as One, for that is 
what they are. 


M 13 A 3. 
Why is the illusion of many necessary? Only because 
reality is not understandable to the deluded. 
Only a very few can 
hear God's Voice at all, and even they cannot communicate His 
messages directly through the Spirit Which gave them. 
They need a 
medium through which communication becomes possible to those 
who do not realize that they are Spirit. 
A body they can see. 
A 
voice they understand and listen to without the fear that truth 


»»(June 14, 1972) 

81 The manuscript says “safe” and a handwritten correction indicates “saved” which is what is in the 
Notes. 


82 Matthew 8:20 Jesus said to him, “Foxes have holes and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of 
Man has nowhere to lay His head.” The “Son of Man” is the term Jesus usually uses to refer to himself 
and people in general in the Gospels, and this phrase in the Course appears to harken to the Gospels. 



1691 


III-33 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


would find 83 in them. 
Do not forget that truth can come only where 
it is welcomed without fear. 
So do God's teachers need a body, for 
their Unity could not be recognized directly. 
M(33) 

M13 A 4. 
Yet what makes them 84 God's teachers is their recognition 
of the proper purpose of the body. 
As they advance in their 
profession, they become more and more certain that the body's 
function is but to let God's Voice speak through it to human ears. 

And these ears will carry to the mind of the hearer messages which 85 
are not of this world, and the mind will understand because of their 
Source. 
From this understanding will come the recognition, in this 
new teacher of God, of what the body's purpose really is; the only 
use there really is for it. 
This lesson is enough to let the Thought of 
Unity come in, and what is One is recognized as One. 
The teachers 
of God appear to share the illusion of separation, but because of 
what they use the body for, they do not believe in the illusion 
despite appearances. 


M13 A 5. 
The central lesson is always this; that what you use the 
body for, it will become to you. 
Use it for sin or for attack, which is 
the same as sin, and you will see it as sinful. 
Because it is sinful it is 
weak, and being weak it suffers and it dies. 
Use it to bring the Word 
of God to those who have It 86 not, and the body becomes holy. 

Because it is holy it cannot be sick, nor can it die. 
When its 
usefulness is done it is laid by, and that is all. 
The mind makes this 
decision, as it makes all decisions which 87 are responsible for the 
body's condition. 
Yet the teacher of God does not make this 
decision alone. 
To do that would be to give the body another 
purpose from the one that keeps it holy. 
God's Voice will tell him 
when he has fulfilled his role, just as It tells him what his function is. 



83 Urtext manuscript has “find” in brackets and “encounter” scratched out. 
The Notes has “find.” 

84 FIP omits “them” but there is a glyph present in the Notes which is reasonably construed to be 
“them.” 

85 FIP changes “which” to “that.” The Notes has the glyph for “which.” 

86 FIP removes the capital I from “It.” It is capitalized in the Notes. 


87 FIP replaces “which” with “that.” The Notes has the glyph for “which.” 


III-34 


1692 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


He does not suffer either in going or remaining. 
Sickness is now 
impossible to him. 


M13 A 6. 
Oneness and sickness cannot co-exist. 
God's teachers 
choose to look on dreams a while. 
It is a conscious choice. 
For they 
have learned that all choices are made consciously, with full 
awareness of their consequences. 
The dream says otherwise, but 
who would put his faith in dreams, once they are recognized for 
what they are? Awareness of dreaming is the real function of God's 
teachers. 
They watch the dream figures come and go, shift and 
change, suffer and die. 
Yet they are not deceived by what they see. 

They recognize that to behold a dream figure as sick and separate is 
no more real than to regard it as healthy and beautiful. 
M(34) Unity 
alone is not a thing of dreams. 
And it is this God's teachers 
acknowledge as behind the dream, beyond all seeing and yet surely 
theirs. 


14, What Is the Real Meaning of Sacrifice? 

M 14 A 1 . 
Although in truth the term sacrifice is altogether 
meaningless, it does have meaning in the world. 
Like all things in 
the world its meaning is temporary, and will ultimately fade into 
the nothingness from which it came when there is no more use for it. 

Now its real meaning is a lesson. 
Like all lessons it is an illusion, for 
in reality there is nothing to learn. 
Yet this illusion must be replaced 
by a corrective device; another illusion that replaces the first, so both 
can finally disappear. 
The first illusion, which must be displaced 
before another thought system can take hold, is that it is a sacrifice 
to give up the things of this world. 
What could this be but an 
illusion, since this world itself is nothing more than that? 

M14 A 2. 
It takes great learning both to realize and to accept the fact 
that the world has nothing to give. 
What can the sacrifice of nothing 
mean? It cannot mean that you have less because of it. 
There is no 
sacrifice in the world's terms that does not involve the body. 
Think 
a while about what the world calls sacrifice. 
Power, fame, money, 
physical pleasure; who is the hero to whom all these things belong? 


1693 


III-35 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume III Manual for Teachers 


Could they mean anything except to a body? Yet a body cannot 
evaluate. 
By seeking after such things the mind associates itself 
with the body, obscuring its identity and losing sight of what it 
really is. 
M(35) 

M 14 A 3. 
Once this confusion has occurred, it becomes impossible for 
the mind to understand that all the "pleasures" of the world are 
nothing. 
But what a sacrifice,- and it is sacrifice indeed 88 - all this 
entails! Now has the mind condemned itself to seek without 
finding 89; to be forever dissatisfied and discontented; to know not 
what it really wants to find. 
Who can escape this self- 
condemnation? Only through God's Word could this be possible. 

For self-condemnation is a decision about identity, and no-one 
doubts what he believes he is. 
He can doubt all things, but never 
this. 


M14 A 4. 
God's teachers can have no regret on giving up the 
pleasures of the world. 
Is it a sacrifice to give up pain? Does an 
adult resent the giving up of children's toys? Does one whose 
vision has already glimpsed the Face of Christ look back with 
longing on a slaughter house? No-one who has escaped the world 
and all its ills looks back on it with condemnation. 
Yet he must 
rejoice that he is free of all the sacrifice which 90 its values 91 would 
demand of him. 
To them he sacrifices all his freedom. 
92 To them he 
sacrifices all his peace. 
93 And to possess them must he sacrifice his 
hope of Heaven and remembrance of his Father's Love. 
Who in his 
sane mind chooses nothing as a substitute for everything? 

M14 A 5. 
What is the real meaning of sacrifice? It is the cost of 
believing in illusions. 
It is the price that must be paid for the denial 


88 FIP puts exclamation point here. 
The Notes does not. 


89 Matthew 7:7-8 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be 
opened to you. 
For everyone who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it will 
be opened.” 

90 FIP omits “which” but it is present in the Notes. 


91 FIP changes the manuscript “sacrifice its value” to “sacrifice its values” which is the reading in the 
Notes. 


92 FIP has “peace” instead of “freedom.” The Notes has “freedom.” 

93 FIP has “freedom” instead of “peace.” The Notes has “peace.” 


HI-36 


1694 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


of truth. 
There is no pleasure of the world that does not demand 
this, for otherwise the pleasure would be seen as pain. 
And no-one 
asks for pain if he recognizes it. 
It is the idea of sacrifice that makes 
him blind. 
He does not see what he is asking for. 
And so he seeks it 
in a thousand ways and in a thousand places, each time believing it 
is there and each time disappointed in the end. 
"Seek but do not 
find 94 " remains this world's stern decree, and no-one who pursues 
the world's goals can do otherwise. 
M(36) 

M 14 A 6. 
You may believe this course requires sacrifice of all you 
really hold dear. 
In one sense that 95 is true, for you hold dear the 
things that crucify God's Son. 
And it is the course's aim to set him 
free. 
But do not be mistaken about what sacrifice means. 
It always 
means the giving up of what you want. 
And what, oh teacher of 
God, is it that you want? You have been called by God, and you 
have answered. 
Would you now sacrifice that Call? Few have 
heard it as yet, and they can but turn to you. 
There is no other hope 
in all the world that they can trust. 
There is no other voice in all the 
world that echoes God's. 
If you would sacrifice the truth, they stay 
in hell. 
And if they stay, you will remain with them. 


M14 A 7. 
Do not forget that sacrifice is total. 
There are no "half 
sacrifices." You cannot give up Heaven partially. 
You cannot be a 
little bit in hell. 
The Word of God has no exceptions. 
It is this that 
makes It holy and beyond the world. 
It is Its holiness that points to 
God. 
It is Its holiness that makes you safe. 
It is denied if you attack 
any brother for anything. 
For it is here the split with God occurs. 
A 
split that is impossible. 
A split that cannot happen. 
Yet a split in 
which you surely will believe, because you have set up a situation 
that is impossible. 
And in this situation the impossible can seem to 
happen. 
It seems to happen at the "sacrifice" of truth. 


M14 A 8. 
Teacher of God, do not forget the meaning of sacrifice, and 


94 Matthew 7:7-8 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be 
opened to you. 
For everyone who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it will 
be opened.” 

95 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “that” to “this.” In the Notes it is the glyph for “that” which is 
present. 



1695 

PROOF COPY 


III-37 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


remember what each decision you make must mean in terms of cost. 

Decide for God, and everything is given you at no cost at all. 
Decide 
against Him and you choose nothing at the expense of the 
awareness of everything. 
What would you teach? Remember only 
what you would learn. 
For it is here that your concern should be. 

Atonement is for you. 
Your learning claims it and your learning 
gives it. 
The world contains it not, but learn this course and it is 
yours. 
God holds out His Word to you, for He has need of teachers. 

What other way is there to save His Son? M(37) 

15. 
How Will the World End? 

M 15 A 1 . 
Can what has no beginning really end? The world will end 
in an illusion, as it began. 
Yet will its ending be an illusion of 
mercy. 
The illusion of forgiveness, complete, excluding no-one, 
limitless in gentleness, will cover it, hiding all evil, concealing all sin 
and ending guilt forever. 
So ends the world that guilt had made, for 
now it has no purpose and is gone. 
The father of illusions is the 
belief that they have a purpose; that they serve a need or gratify a 
want. 
Perceived as purposeless, they are no longer seen. 
Their 
uselessness is recognized and they are gone. 
How but in this way 
are all illusions ended? They have been brought to truth, and truth 
saw them not. 
It merely overlooked the meaningless. 


M15 A 2. 
Until forgiveness is complete, the world does have a 
purpose. 
It becomes the home in which forgiveness is born, and 
where it grows and becomes stronger and more all embracing. 
Here 
is it nourished, for here it is needed. 
A gentle Savior, born where sin 
was made and guilt seemed real. 
Here is His home, for here there is 
need of Him indeed. 
He brings the ending of the world with Him. 


It is His Call God's teachers answer, turning to Him in silence to 
receive His Word. 
The world will end when all things in it have 
been rightly judged by His judgment. 
The world will end with the 
benediction of holiness upon it. 
When not one thought of sin 
remains, the world is over. 
It will not be destroyed nor attacked nor 
even touched. 
It will merely cease to seem to be. 



III-38 


1696 


PROOF 


COPY 


Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M15 A 3. 
Certainly this seems to be a long, long while away. 
"When 
not one thought of sin remains" appears to be a long-range goal 
indeed. 
But time stands still, and waits on the goals 96 of God's 
teachers. 
Not one thought of sin will remain the instant any one of 
them accepts the 97 Atonement for himself. 
It is not easier to forgive 
one sin than to forgive all of them. 
The illusion of orders of 
difficulty is an obstacle the teacher of God must learn to pass by and 
leave behind. 
One sin perfectly forgiven by one teacher of God can 
make salvation complete. 
Can you understand this? No; it is 
meaningless to anyone here. 
Yet it is the final lesson M(38) in which 
Unity is restored. 
It goes against all the thinking of the world, but 
so 98 does Heaven. 


M 15 A 4. 
The world will end when its thought system has been 
completely reversed. 
Until then, bits and pieces of its thinking will 
still seem sensible. 
The final lesson which brings the ending of the 
world cannot be grasped by those not yet prepared to leave the 
world and go beyond its tiny reach. 
What, then, is the function of 
the teacher of God in this concluding lesson? He need merely learn 
how to approach it; to be willing to go in its direction. 
He need 
merely trust that, if God's Voice tells him it is a lesson he can learn, 
he can learn it. 
He does not judge it either as hard or easy. 
His 
Teacher points to it, and he trusts that He will show him how to 
learn it. 


M15 A 5. 
The world will end in joy because it is a place of sorrow. 

When joy has come the purpose of the world has gone. 
The world 
will end in peace because it is a place of war. 
When peace has come, 
what is the purpose of the world? The world will end in laughter 
because it is a place of tears. 
Where there is laughter, who can 99 


96 FIP changes “goals” to “goal.” The Notes has the plural, “goals.” 

97 FIP omits “the.” It is present in the Notes however. 


98 Although not part of the original typing, the handwritten mark-up and FIP add “but” before “so” and 
so does the Notes. 


99 “who can any longer weep” sounds much better than “who can longer weep.” Possibly there is an 
Iambic Pentameter issue here. 
All versions have it the same, we’re just noting the odd syntax as a 
possible clue to an error. 



1697 


III-39 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


longer weep? And only complete forgiveness brings all this to bless 
the world. 
In blessing it departs, for it will not end as it began. 
To 
turn hell into Heaven is the function of God's teachers, for what 
they teach are lessons in which Heaven is reflected. 
And now sit 
down in true humility, and realize that all God would have you do 
you can do. 
Do not be arrogant and say you cannot learn His Own 
curriculum. 
His Word says otherwise. 
His Will be done. 
It cannot 
be otherwise. 
And be you thankful it is so. 
M(39) 

16. 
Is Each One to be Judged In the End? 

M16 A l. 
Indeed , 100 yes! No-one can escape God's final judgment. 

Who could flee forever from the truth? But the final judgment will 
not come until it is no longer associated with fear. 
One day each 
one will welcome it, and on that very day it will be given him. 
He 
will hear his sinlessness proclaimed around and around the world, 
setting it free as God's final judgment on him is received. 
This is the 
judgment in which salvation lies. 
This is the judgment that will set 
him free. 
This is the judgment in which all things are freed with 
him. 
Time pauses as eternity comes near, and silence lies across the 
world that everyone may hear this judgment of the Son of God: 

"Holy are you, eternal, free and whole, 

At peace forever in the Heart of God. 


Wliere is the world, and where is sorrow now?” 

M16 A 2. 
Is this your judgment on yourself, teacher of God? Do you 
believe that this is wholly true? No, not yet, not yet. 
But this is still 
your goal; why you are here. 
It is your function to prepare yourself 
to hear this judgment and to recognize that it is true. 
One instant of 
complete belief in this, and you will go beyond belief to Certainty. 

One instant out of time can bring time's end. 
Judge not, for you but 
judge yourself 101 and thus delay this final judgment. 
What is your 
judgment on 102 the world, teacher of God? Have you yet learned to 
stand aside and hear the Voice of Judgment in yourself? Or do you 


™ (June 26, 1972) 

101 Matthew 7:1 “Judge not, that you be not judged.” 

102 FIP changes “on” to “of’ but in the Notes it is clearly “on.” 


in-40 


1698 

PROOF COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


still attempt to take His role from Him? Learn to be quiet, for His 
Voice is heard in stillness. 
And His Judgment comes to all who 
stand aside in quiet listening, and wait for Him. 
M(40) 

M 16 A3. 
You who are sometimes sad and sometimes angry; who 
sometimes feel your just due is not given you, and your best efforts 
meet with lack of appreciation and even with 103 contempt; give up 
these foolish thoughts. 
104 They are too small and meaningless to 
occupy your holy minds 105 an instant longer. 
God's Judgment waits 
for you to set you free. 
What can the world hold out to you, 
regardless of your judgments on its gifts, that you would rather 
have? You will be judged, and judged in fairness and in honesty. 

There is no deceit in God. 
His promises are sure. 
Only remember 
that. 
His promises have guaranteed His judgment, and His alone, 
will be accepted in the end. 
It is your function to make that end be 
soon. 
It is your function to hold it in 106 your heart, and offer it to all 
the world to keep it safe. 


17. 
How Should the Teacher of God Spend His Day? 

M 17 A 1 . 
To the advanced teacher of God this question is 
meaningless. 
There is no program, for the lessons in the 
curriculum 107 change each day. 
Yet he 108 is sure of but one thing; 
they do not change at random. 
Seeing this, and understanding it is 
true, he rests content. 
He will be told all that his role should be, this 
day and every day. 
And those who share that role with him will 
find him, so they can learn the lessons for the day together. 
Not one 
is absent whom he needs; not one is sent without a learning goal 
already set, and one which can be met 109 that very day. 
For the 
advanced teacher of God, then, this question is superfluous. 
It has 


103 FIP omits “with” however this is present in the Notes. 


104 FIP adds “!” (exclamation point) but that is not present in the Notes. 


105 FIP has “mind” instead of “minds” but in the Notes it is “minds.” 

106 FIP changes “hold it in your heart” to “hold it to your heart.” The Notes has “in your heart.” 

107 FIP omits “in the curriculum” and the Urtext manuscript places it in parentheses. 
The Notes has it 
just as it is here. 


108 FIP replaces “he” with “the teacher of God” however the Notes has it just as it stands here. 


109 FIP replaces “met” with “learned.” The Notes has “met.” 


1699 


III-41 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


been asked and answered, and he keeps in constant contact with the 
Answer. 
He is set, and 110 sees the road on which he walks stretch 
surely and smoothly before him. 


M 17 A 2. 
But what about those who have not reached his certainty? 
They are not yet ready for such lack of structuring on their own 
part. 
What must they do to learn to give the day to God? There are 
some general rules which do apply, although each one must use 
them as best he can in his own way. 
Routines as such are 
dangerous, because they easily become gods in their own right, 
threatening the very goals for which they were set up. 
Broadly 
speaking, then, it can be said M(41) that it is well to start the day 
right. 
It is always possible to begin again, should the day begin with 
error. 
Yet there are obvious advantages in terms of saving time if 
the need for this can be avoided. 
* * 111 

M 17 A 3. 
At the beginning it is wise to think in terms of time. 
This is 
by no means the ultimate criterion, but at the outset it is probably 
the simplest to observe. 
The saving of time 112 is an essential early 
emphasis which, although it remains important throughout the 
learning process, becomes less and less emphasized. 
At the outset, 
we can safely say that time devoted to starting the day right does 
indeed save time. 
How much time should be so spent? This must 
depend on the teacher of God himself. 
He cannot claim that title 
until he has gone through the Workbook, since we are learning 
within the framework of our course. 
After completion of the more 
structured practice periods which the Workbook contains, 
individual need becomes the chief consideration. 


M17 A 4. 
This course is always practical. 
It may be that the teacher 
of God is not in a situation which 113 fosters quiet thought as he 


110 Urtext manuscript doesn’t have “and”, it is handwritten in. 
FIP preserves it. 
It is also present in the 

Notes. 


111 FIP omits the phrase “if the need for this can be avoided.” The phrase is present in the Notes. 


112 The Manuscript says “the saving of the mind” and FIP changes that to “the saving of time” which 
corrects the passage to conform to its original form in the Notes. 
We’re viewing this as a copying 
mistake in the Urtext manuscript and incorporating this correction. 


113 FIP changes “which” to “that.” It is “which” in the Notes. 



III-42 


1700 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


awakes. 
If this is so, let him but remember that he chooses to spend 
time with God as soon as possible, and let him do so. 
Duration is 
not the major concern. 
One can easily sit still an hour with closed 
eyes, and accomplish nothing. 
One can as easily give God only an 
instant, and in that instant join with Him completely. 
Perhaps the 
one generalization that can be made is this; as soon as possible after 
waking take your quiet time, continuing a minute or two after you 
begin to find it difficult. 
You may find that the difficulty will 
diminish and drop away. 
If not, that is the time to stop. 


M17 A 5. 
The same procedures should be followed at night. 
Perhaps 
your quiet time should be fairly early in the evening, if it is not 
feasible for you to take it just before going to sleep. 
It is not wise to 
lie down for it. 
It is better to sit up, in whatever position you prefer. 

Having gone through the Workbook you must have come to some 
conclusions in this respect. 
If possible, M(42) however, just before 
sleeping 114 is a desirable time to devote to God. 
It sets your mind 
into a pattern of rest, and orients you away from fear. 
If it is 
expedient to spend this time earlier, at least be sure that you do not 
forget a brief period,- not more than a moment will do,- in which 
you close your eyes and think of God. 


M 17 A 6. 
There is one thought in particular that should be 
remembered throughout the day. 
It is a thought of pure joy; a 
thought of peace, a thought of limitless release, - limitless because 
all things are freed within it. 
You think you made a place of safety 
for yourself. 
You think you made a power that can save you from 
all the fearful things you see in dreams. 
It is not so. 
Your safety lies 
not there. 
What you give up is merely the illusion of protecting 
illusions. 
And it is this you fear, and only this. 
How foolish to be so 
afraid of nothing! Nothing at all! Your defenses will not work, but 
you are not in danger. 
You have no need of them. 
Recognize this 
and they will disappear. 
And only then will you accept your real 
protection. 



114 FIP changes “sleeping” to “going to sleep.” It is “sleeping” in the Notes. 



1701 


III-43 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M17 A 7. 
How simply and how easily does time 115 slip by for the 
teacher of God who has accepted His protection! All that he did 
before in the name of safety no longer interests him. 
For he is safe, 
and knows it to be 116 so. 
He has a Guide Who will not fail. 
He need 
make no distinctions among the problems he perceives, for He to 
Whom he turns with all of them recognizes no order of difficulty in 
resolving them. 
He is as safe in the present as he was before 
illusions were accepted into his mind, and as he will be when he has 
let them go. 
There is no difference in his state at different times and 
different places, because they are all one to God. 
This is his safety. 

And he has no need for more than this. 


M17 A 8. 
Yet there will be temptations along the way the teacher of 
God has yet to travel, and he has need of reminding himself 
throughout the day of his protection. 
How can he do this, 
particularly during the time when his mind is occupied with 
external things? He can but try, and his success depends on his 
conviction that he will succeed. 
He must be sure success is not of 
him, but will be given him at any M(43) time, in any place and 
circumstance he calls for it. 
There are times his certainty will waver, 
and the instant this occurs he will return to earlier attempts to place 
reliance on himself alone. 
Forget not this is magic, and that 117 magic 
is a sorry substitute for true assistance. 
It is not good enough for 
God's teacher because it is not good 118 enough for God's Son. 


M 17 A 9. 
The avoidance of magic is the avoidance of temptation. 
For 
all temptation is nothing more than the attempt to substitute 
another will for God's. 
These attempts may indeed seem 
frightening, yet 119 they are merely pathetic. 
They can have no 
effects; neither good nor bad, neither rewarding nor demanding 


115 The Urtext manuscript has the words “the day” typed in above “time” indicating a correction, but 
“time” is not crossed out. 
The Notes has “time” and so does FIP. 


116 Originally typed “is”, the handwritten mark-up and FIP change “is” to “to be” which is the reading in 
the Notes. 


117 FIP omits “that” however it is present in the Notes. 


118 FIP omits “good” however it is present in the Notes. 


119 FIP changes “yet” to “but.” It is “but” in the Notes. 



III-44 


1702 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


sacrifice, healing nor destructive, quieting nor fearful. 
When all 
magic is recognized as merely nothing, the teacher of God has 
reached the most advanced state. 
All intermediate lessons will but 
lead to this, and bring this goal nearer to recognition. 
For magic of 
any kind, in all its forms, 120 simply does nothing. 
Its powerlessness 
is the reason it can be so easily escaped. 
What has no effects can 
hardly terrify. 


M17 A10. 
There is no substitute for the Will of God. 
In simple 
statement, it is to this 121 fact that the teacher of God devotes his day. 

Each substitute he may accept as real can but deceive him. 
But he is 
safe from all deception if he so decides. 
Perhaps he needs to 
remember "God is with me. 
I cannot be deceived." Perhaps he 
prefers other words, or only one or none at all. 
Yet each temptation 
to accept magic as true must be abandoned through his recognition 
not that it is fearful, not that it is sinful, not that it is dangerous, but 
merely that it is meaningless. 
Rooted in sacrifice and separation, 
two aspects of one error and no more, he merely chooses to give up 
all that he never had. 
And for this "sacrifice" is Heaven restored to 
his awareness. 
M(44) 

M 17 A11. 
Is not this an exchange that you would want? The world 
would gladly make it, if it knew it could be made. 
It is God's 
teachers who must teach it that it can. 
And so it is their function to 
make sure that they have learned it. 
No risk is possible throughout 
the day except to put your trust in magic, for it is only this that leads 
to pain. 
"There is no will but God's." His teachers know that this is 
so, and have learned that everything but this is magic. 
All belief in 
magic is maintained by just one simple-minded illusion; - that it 
works. 
All through his training, every day and hour, and even 
every minute and second, must God's teachers learn to recognize the 
forms of magic and perceive their meaninglessness. 
Fear is 


120 The Urtext manuscript types above the originally typed “in any form” the words “in all its forms”. 

FIP uses that reading, which is the reading in the Notes. 


121 In the Urtext manuscript the word “simple” appears here. 
Handwritten mark-up crosses out 
“simple,” FIP omits it. 
It is not present in the Notes. 



1703 


III-45 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


withdrawn from them and so they go. 
And thus the Gate of Heaven 
is reopened, and its light can shine again on an untroubled mind. 


18. 
How Do God's Teachers Deal With Their Pupils' 
Thoughts of Magic? 

M 18 A 1 . 
This is a crucial question both for teacher and pupil. 
122 If 
this issue is mishandled, the teacher of God has hurt himself and has 
also attacked his pupil. 
This strengthens fear and makes the magic 
seem quite real to both of them. 
How to deal with magic thus 
becomes a major lesson for the teacher of God to master. 
His first 
responsibility in this is not to attack it. 
If a magic thought arouses 
anger in any form, God's teacher 123 can be sure that he is 
strengthening his own belief in sin and has condemned himself. 
He 
can be sure as well that he has asked for depression, pain, fear and 
disaster to come to him. 
Let him remember, then, it is not this that 
he would teach because it is not this that he would learn. 


M 18 A 2. 
There is, however, a temptation to respond to magic in a 
way that reinforces it. 
Nor is this always obvious. 
It can, in fact, be 
easily concealed beneath a wish to help. 
It is this double wish that 
makes the help of little value, and must lead to undesired outcomes. 

Nor should it be forgotten that the outcome that 124 results will 
always come to teacher and to pupil. 
125 How many times has it been 
emphasized that you give but to yourself? And where could this be 
better shown than in the kinds of help the teacher gives to those 
who need his aid? Here is his gift M(45) most clearly given him. 
For 
he will give only what he has chosen for himself. 
And in this gift is 
his judgment upon the holy Son of God. 


M18 A 3. 
It is easiest to let error be corrected where it is most 
apparent, and errors can be recognized by their results. 
A lesson 


122 Urtext manuscript has “student” crossed out, and “pupil” penciled in. 
It is “pupil” in the Notes. 


123 Urtext manuscript has the plural, “teachers” here. 
The Notes uses an abbreviation which could be 
read as either. 
The singular works better in the context, since the following pronoun “he” refers back to 
this word and if it were plural, the pronoun would be “they.” 

124 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change the originally typed “which” to “that” which corrects the 
passage to conform to the Notes. 


125 FIP inserts here “alike.” That word is not present in the Notes. 



III-46 


1704 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


truly taught can lead to nothing but release for teacher and pupil, 
who have shared in one intent. 
Attack can enter only if perception 
of separate goals has entered. 
And this must indeed have been the 
case if the result is anything but joy. 
The single aim of the teacher 
turns the divided goal of the pupil into one direction, with the call 
for help becoming his one appeal. 
This then is easily responded to 
with just one answer, and this answer will enter the teacher's mind 
unfailingly. 
From there it shines into his pupil's mind, making it 
one with his. 


M18 A 4. 
Perhaps it will be helpful to remember that no-one can be 
angry at a fact. 
It is always an interpretation that gives rise to 
negative emotions, regardless of their seeming justification by what 
appear as facts. 
126 Regardless, too, of the intensity of the anger 
which 127 is aroused. 
It may be merely slight irritation, perhaps too 
mild to be even clearly recognized. 
Or it may also take the form of 
intense rage, accompanied by thoughts of violence, fantasied or 
apparently acted out. 
It does not matter. 
All of these reactions are 
the same. 
They obscure the truth, and this can never be a matter of 
degree. 
Either truth is apparent or it is not. 
It cannot be partially 
recognized. 
Who is unaware of truth must look upon 128 illusions. 


M18 A 5. 
Anger in response to perceived magic thoughts is a 129 basic 
cause of fear. 
Consider what this reaction means, and its centrality 
in the world's thought system becomes apparent. 
A magic thought, 
by its mere presence, acknowledges a separation from God. 
It 
states, in the clearest form possible, that the mind which thinks it 130 


126 Urtext manuscript has “appears as facts,” FIP emphasizes the word “appears” and has “appears as 
facts.” The Notes has “is seen as facts.” There is a grammar problem with “what appears as facts.” 
Either “appears as fact” or “appear as facts” work, but “appears as facts” does not. 
This is a tricky 
sentence to parse, but “appears” is a verb and the subject of that verb is the facts which are appearing. 

If there is more than one fact, then they appear. 
If there is only one then it appears. 


127 FIP changes “which” to “that” but it is “which” in the Notes. 


128 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change the originally typed “see” to “look upon” which is also the 
reading in the Notes. 


129 The Urtext manuscript has the word “the” typed in above “a” in “a basic cause.” FIP makes it “a 
basic cause” as does the Notes. 


130 FIP omits “thinks it” so the sentence becomes “the mind which believes.” The Notes has it as it is 
here. 



1705 


III-47 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


believes it has a separate will that can oppose the Will of God and 
succeed. 
That this can hardly be a fact is obvious. 
Yet that it can be 
believed as fact is surely so. 
131 And herein lies the birthplace of 
guilt. 
Who usurps the place of God and takes it for himself now has 
a deadly "enemy." And he must stand alone in his protection, and 
make himself a shield to keep him safe from fury that can never be 
abated and vengeance that can never be satisfied. 
M(46) 

M18 A 6. 
How can this unfair battle be resolved? Its ending is 
inevitable, for its outcome must be death. 
How then can one believe 
in one's defenses? Magic again must help. 
Forget the battle. 
Accept 
it as a fact and then forget it. 
Do not remember the impossible odds 
against you. 
Do not remember the immensity of the "enemy," and 
do not think about your frailty in comparison. 
Accept your 
separation, but do not remember how it came about. 
Believe that 
you have won it, but do not retain the slightest memory of Who 
your great "opponent" really is. 
Projecting your "forgetting" onto 
Him, it seems to you He has forgotten, too. 


M 18 A 7. 
But what will now be your reaction to all magic thoughts? 
They can but reawaken sleeping guilt, which you have hidden but 
have not let go. 
Each one says clearly to your frightened mind, 

"You have usurped the place of God. 
Think not He has forgotten." 
Here we have the fear of God most starkly represented. 
For in that 
thought has guilt already raised madness to the throne of God 
Himself. 
And now there is no hope. 
Except 132 to kill. 
Here is 
salvation now. 
An angry Father pursues His guilty Son. 
Kill or be 
killed, for here alone is choice. 
Beyond this there is none, for what 
was done cannot be done without. 
The stain of blood can never be 
removed, and anyone who bears this stain on him must meet with 
death. 


M18 A 8. 
Into this hopeless situation God sends His teachers. 
They 
bring the light of hope from God Himself. 
There is a Way in which 
escape is possible. 
It can be learned and taught, but it requires 

131 FIP replaces “so” with “obvious.” The Notes has “so.” 

132 The Urtext manuscript also has “accept” instead of “except.” The Notes has “Except.” 


III-48 


1706 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


patience and abundant willingness. 
Given that, the lesson's 
manifest simplicity stands out like an intense white light against a 
black horizon, for such it is. 
If anger comes from an interpretation 
and not a fact, it is never justified. 
Once this is even dimly grasped, 
the Way is open. 
Now it is possible to take the next step. 
The 
interpretation can be changed at last. 
Magic thoughts need not lead 
to condemnation, for they do not really have the power to give rise 
to guilt. 
And so they can be overlooked, and thus forgiven 133 in the 
truest sense. 
M(47) 

M 18 A 9. 
Madness but seems terrible. 
In truth it has no power to 
make anything. 
Like the magic which becomes its servant, it neither 
attacks nor protects. 
To see it and to recognize its thought system is 
to look on nothing. 
Can nothing give rise to anger? Hardly so. 

Remember then, teacher of God, that anger recognizes a reality that 
is not there; yet is the anger certain witness that you do believe in it 
as fact. 
Now is escape impossible until you see you have responded 
to your own interpretation, which you have projected on an outside 
world. 
Let this grim sword be taken from you now. 
There is no 
death. 
134 This sword does not exist. 
The fear of God is causeless. 


But His Love is Cause of everything beyond all fear, and thus 
forever real and always true. 


19. 
Howls Correction Made? 

M 19 A 1 . 
Correction of a lasting nature, - and only this is true 
correction, - cannot be made until the teacher of God has ceased to 
confuse interpretation with fact, or illusion with truth. 
If he argues 
with his pupil about a magic thought, attacks it, tries to establish its 
error or demonstrate its falsity, he is but witnessing to its reality. 

Depression is then inevitable, for he has "proved" both to his pupil 
and himself that it is their task to escape from what is real. 
And this 
can only be impossible. 
Reality is changeless. 
Magic thoughts are 
but illusions. 
Otherwise salvation would be only the same age old 


133 FIP replaces “forgiven” with “forgotten”!! The Notes has “forgiven.” 

134 2 Timothy 1:10 But has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel. 



1707 


III-49 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


impossible dream in but another form. 
Yet the dream of salvation 
has new content. 
It is not the form alone in which the difference 
lies. 


M19 A 2. 
God's teachers' major lesson is to learn how to react to 
magic thoughts wholly without anger. 
Only in this way can they 
proclaim the truth about themselves. 
Through them, the Holy Spirit 
can now speak of the reality of the Son of God. 
Now He can remind 
the world of sinlessness, the one unchanged, unchangeable 
condition of all that God created. 
Now He can speak the Word of 
God to listening ears, and bring Christ's vision to eyes that see. 


Now is He free to teach all minds the truth of what they are, so they 
will gladly be returned to Him. 
And now is guilt forgiven, 
overlooked completely in His sight and in God's Word. 
M(48) 

M19 A 3. 
Anger but screeches, "Guilt is real!" Reality is blotted 135 out 
as this insane belief is taken as replacement for God's Word. 
The 
body's eyes now "see"; its ears alone are thought to 136 hear. 
Its little 
space and tiny breath become the measure of reality. 
And truth 
becomes diminutive and meaningless. 
Correction has one answer to 
all this, and to the world that rests on this: 

"You but mistake interpretation for the truth. 
And you are . 
wrong. 

But a mistake is not a sin, nor has reality been taken . 
from its throne 
by your mistakes. 
God reigns forever, and His . 
laws alone prevail 
upon you and upon the world. 
His Love . 

remains the only thing there is. 
Fear is illusion, for you are like 
Him." 

M19 A 4. 
In order to heal, it thus becomes essential for the teacher of 
God to let all his own mistakes be corrected. 
If he senses even the 
faintest hint of irritation in himself as he responds to anyone, let him 
instantly realize that he has made an interpretation which is not 
true. 
Then let him turn within to his Eternal Guide, and let Him 
Judge what the response should be. 
So is he healed, and in his 


135 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “blotted” while the Urtext manuscript has “blocked.” The Notes 
has “blotted.” 

136 FIP replaces “are thought to” with “can.” The Notes has “are thought to.” 


III-50 


1708 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


healing is his pupil healed with him. 
The sole responsibility of 
God's teacher is to accept the Atonement for himself. 
Atonement 
means correction, or the undoing of errors. 
When this has been 
accomplished, the teacher of God becomes a miracle worker by 
definition. 
His sins have been forgiven him, and he no longer 
condemns himself. 
How can he then condemn anyone? And who is 
there whom his forgiveness can fail to heal?" 

20. 
What Is Justice? 

M 20 A l. 
Justice is the divine correction for injustice. 
Injustice is the 
basis for all the judgments of the world. 
Justice corrects the 
interpretations to which injustice gives rise, and cancels them out. 

Neither justice nor injustice exists in Heaven, for error is impossible 
and correction meaningless. 
In this world, however, forgiveness 
depends on justice, since all attack can only be unjust. 
Justice is the 
Holy Spirit's verdict upon the world. 
Except in His judgment justice 
is M(49) impossible, for no-one in the world is capable of making 
only just interpretations and laying all injustices aside. 
If God's Son 
were fairly judged, there would be no need for salvation. 
The 
thought of separation would have been forever inconceivable. 


M 20 A 2. 
Justice, like its opposite, is an interpretation. 
It is, however, 
the one interpretation that leads to truth. 
This becomes possible 
because, while it is not true in itself, justice includes nothing that 
opposes truth. 
There is no inherent conflict between justice and 
truth; one is but the first small step in the direction of the other. 
The 
path becomes quite different as one goes along. 
Nor could all the 
magnificence, the grandeur of the scene and the enormous opening 
vistas that rise to meet one as he travels on, 137 be foretold from the 
outset. 
Yet even these, whose splendor reaches indescribable 
heights as one proceeds, fall short indeed of all that awaits one 138 


137 FIP replaces “he travels on” with “the journey continues.” The Notes has “he travels on.” 

138 Urtext manuscript has “waits”. 
Handwritten mark-up suggests “awaits one”, although it is possible 
that the handwritten mark-up indicates “’waits” (contraction of “awaits”). 
FIP changes “waits” to 
“wait” viewing “all” as plural, (possibly) which it can be, but isn’t necessarily. 
One can have “all is 
well” as well as “all are well.” The Notes has “awaits one.” 


1709 


m-51 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


when the pathway ceases and time ends with it. 
But somewhere 
one must start. 
Justice is the beginning. 


M 20 A 3. 
All concepts of your brothers and yourself; all fears of 
future states and all concern 139 about the past stem from injustice. 

Here is the lens which, held before the body's eyes, distorts 
perception and brings witness of the distorted world back to the 
mind that made the lens and holds it very dear. 
Selectively and 
arbitrarily is every concept of the world built up in 140 just this way. 

"Sins" are perceived and justified by this 141 careful selectivity in 
which all thought of wholeness must be lost. 
Forgiveness has no 
place in such a scheme, for not one "sin" but seems forever true. 


M 20 A 4. 
Salvation is God's justice. 
It restores to your awareness the 
wholeness of the fragments you perceive as broken off and separate. 

And it is this that overcomes the fear of death. 
142 For separate 
fragments must decay and die, but wholeness is immortal. 
It 
remains forever and forever like its Creator, being one with Him. 

God's Judgment is His justice. 
Onto this, - a judgment wholly 
lacking in condemnation; an evaluation based entirely on love, - 
you have projected your injustice, giving 143 God the lens of warped 
perception through which you look. 
Now it belongs to Him and not 
to you. 
You are afraid of Him, and do not see you hate and fear 
your Self as enemy. 
M(50) 

M 20 A 5. 
Pray for God's justice, and do not confuse His mercy with 
your own insanity. 
Perception can make whatever picture the mind 
desires to see. 
Remember this. 
In this lies either Heaven or hell, as 
you elect. 
God’s justice points to Heaven just because it is entirely 
impartial. 
It accepts all evidence that is brought before it, omitting 
nothing and assessing nothing as separate and apart from all the 


139 FIP pluralizes “concern” making it “concerns”. 
That is also what the Notes has. 


140 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “in” which is also present in the Notes. 


141 FIP omits “this” as does the Notes. 


142 Urtext manuscript and FIP and the Notes all put a sentence break here needlessly, rendering the 
following clause into an incomplete sentence. 


143 The Urtext manuscript has “attributing to” typed above “giving.” FIP goes with “giving God” while 
the Notes has “giving Him.” 


III-52 


1710 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


rest. 
From this one standpoint does it judge, and this alone. 
Here 
all attack and condemnation become 144 meaningless and 
indefensible. 
Perception rests, the mind is still, and light returns 
again. 
Vision is now restored. 
What had been lost has now been 
found. 
145 The peace of God descends on all the world, and we can 
see. 
And we can see! 

21. 
What Is the Peace of God 146 ? 

M 21A l. 
It has been said that there is a kind of peace that is not of 
this world. 
147 How is it recognized? How is it found? And being 
found, how can it be retained? Let us consider each of these 
questions separately, for each reflects a different step along the way. 


M 21A 2. 
First, how can the peace of God be recognized? God's 
peace is recognized at first by just one thing; in every way it is 
totally unlike all previous experiences. 
It calls to mind nothing that 
went before. 
It brings with it no past associations. 
It is a new thing 
entirely. 
There is a contrast, yes, between this thing and all the past. 

But strangely, it is not a contrast of true differences. 
The past just 
slips away, and in its place is everlasting quiet. 
Only that. 
The 
contrast first perceived has 148 merely gone. 
Quiet has reached to 
cover everything. 


M 21 A 3. 
How is this quiet found? No-one can fail to find it who but 
seeks out its conditions. 
God's peace can never come where anger 
is, for anger must deny that peace exists. 
149 Who sees anger as 
justified in any way or any circumstance proclaims that peace is 


144 FIP changes “become” to “becomes.” The subject is “attack and condemnation” which is plural so 
the Urtext is correct. 
The Notes has an abbreviation “bee.” which could be either. 


145 Luke 15:24 “For this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.” And they began 
to be merry. 


146 Philippians 4:7 “And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall guard your hearts 
and your thoughts in Christ Jesus.” 

147 John 14:27 “Peace I leave with you, My peace I give to you; not as the world gives do I give to you. 

Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.” 

148 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change the originally typed “is” to “has” which is the reading in the 
Notes. 


149 Deuteronomy 4:29 “But from there you will seek the LORD your God, and you will find Him if 
you seek Him with all your heart and with all your soul.” 


1711 


III-53 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


meaningless, and must believe that it cannot exist. 
In this condition, 
peace cannot be found. 
Therefore, forgiveness is the necessary 
condition for finding the peace of God. 
More than this, given 
forgiveness there must be peace. 
For what except attack will lead to 
war? And what but peace is opposite to war? Here the initial 
contrast stands out clear and apparent. 
Yet when peace is found, 
the war M(51) is meaningless. 
And it is conflict now that is perceived 
as non-existent and unreal. 


M 21A 4. 
How is the peace of God retained, once it is found? 
Returning anger, in whatever form, will drop the heavy curtain once 
again, and the belief that peace cannot exist will certainly return. 

War is again accepted as the one reality. 
Now must you once again 
lay down your sword, although you will 150 not recognize that you 
have picked it up again. 
But you will learn, as you remember even 
faintly now what happiness was yours without it, that you must 
have taken it again as your defense. 
Stop for a moment now and 
think of this: Is conflict what you want, or is God's peace the better 
choice? Which gives you more? A tranquil mind is not a little gift. 

Would you not rather live than choose to die? 

M 21A 5. 
Living is joy, but death can only weep. 
You see in death 
escape from what you made. 
But this you do not see; that you made 
death, and it is but illusion of an end. 
Death cannot be escape, 
because it is not life in which the problem lies. 
Life has no opposite, 
for it is God. 
Life and death seem to be opposites because you have 
decided 151 death ends life. 
Forgive the world, and you will 
understand that everything which 152 God created cannot have an 
end, and nothing He did not create is real. 
In this one sentence is 
our course explained. 
In this one sentence is our practicing given its 


150 Handwritten mark-up suggests “may,” FIP changes “will” to “do.” The Notes has the glyph for 
“will.” 

151 Handwritten mark-up suggests inserting “that.” The word “that” is present in the Notes but is 
scratched out. 
At least there is a scratched out word in this spot in the Notes which could be “that.” FIP 
does not insert the word. 


152 FIP changes “which” to “that.” The Notes has “which.” 


III-54 


1712 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


one direction. 
And in this 153 the Holy Spirit's whole curriculum is 
specified exactly as it is. 


M 21A 6. 
What is the peace of God? No more than this; the simple 
understanding that His Will is wholly without opposite. 
There is no 
thought that contradicts His Will, yet can be true. 
The contrast 
between His Will and yours but seemed to be reality. 
In truth there 
is 154 no conflict, because His Will is yours. 
Now is the mighty Will 
of God Himself His gift to you. 
He does not seek to keep it for 
Himself. 
Why would you seek to keep your tiny, frail imaginings 
apart from Him? The Will of God is One and all there is. 
This is 
your heritage. 
The universe beyond the sun and stars, and all the 
thoughts of which you can conceive, belong to you. 
God's peace is 
the condition for His Will. 
Attain His peace, and you remember 
Him. 
M(52) 

22. 
What Is the Role of Words in Healing? 

M 22 A l. 
Strictly speaking, words play no part at all in healing. 
The 
motivating factor is prayer, or asking. 
What you ask for you 
receive. 
155 But this refers to the prayer of the heart, not to the words 
you use in praying. 
Sometimes the words and the prayer are 
contradictory; sometimes they agree. 
It does not matter. 
God does 
not understand words, for they were made by separated minds to 
keep them in the illusion of separation. 
Words can be helpful, 
particularly for the beginner, in helping concentration and 
facilitating the exclusion or at least the control of extraneous 
thoughts. 
Let us not forget, however, that words are but symbols of 
symbols. 
They are thus twice removed from reality. 


M 22 A 2. 
As symbols, words have quite specific references. 
Even 
when they seem most abstract, the picture which 156 comes to mind is 
apt to be very concrete. 
Unless a specific referent does occur to the 
mind in conjunction with the word, the word has little or no 

153 FIP adds the words “one sentence.” Those words are not present in the Notes. 


154 FIP changes “is” to “was” which is the reading in the Notes. 


155 Matthew 21:22 “And all things, whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive.” 

156 FIP changes “which” to “that;” the Notes has “which.” 


1713 


III-55 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


practical meaning and thus cannot help the healing process. 
The 
prayer of the heart does not really ask for concrete things. 
It always 
requests some kind of experience, the specific things asked for being 
the bringers of the desired experience in the judgment 157 of the 
asker. 
The words, then, are symbols for the thing 158 asked for, but 
the things themselves but stand for the experiences which 159 are 
hoped for. 


M 22 A 3. 
The prayer for things of this world will bring experiences 
of this world. 
If the prayer of the heart asks for this, this will be 
given because this will be received. 
It is impossible that the prayer 
of the heart remain unanswered in the perception of the one who 
asks. 
If he asks for the impossible, if he wants what does not exist or 
seeks for illusions in his heart, all this becomes his own. 
The power 
of his decision offers it to him as he requests. 
Herein lie hell and 
Heaven. 
The sleeping Son of God has but this power left to him. 
It 
is enough. 
His words do not matter. 
Only the Word of God has any 
meaning, because it symbolizes that which has no human symbols 
at all. 
The Holy Spirit alone understands what this Word stands for. 

And this, too, is enough. 
M(53) 

M 22 A 4. 
Is the teacher of God then to avoid the use of words in his 
teaching? No, indeed. 
There are many who must be reached 
through words, being as yet unable to hear in silence. 
The teacher of 
God must, however, learn to use words in a new way. 
Gradually, 
he learns how to let his words be chosen for him by ceasing to 
decide for himself what he will say. 
This process is merely a special 
case of the Workbook lesson 160 "I will step back and let Him lead the 
way." The teacher of God accepts the words which are offered him 
and gives as he receives. 
He does not control the direction of his 
speaking. 
He listens and hears and speaks. 



157 FIP changes “judgment” to “opinion.” The Notes has “opinion” written first, crossed out, and 
changed to “judgment.” 

158 FIP changes “thing” to “things.” The Notes has “things.” 

159 FIP changes “which” to “that.” The Notes has “which.” 

160 FIP changes “Workbook lesson” to “lesson in the workbook that says.” The Notes has “lesson in the 
workbook which says...” 


III-56 


1714 

PROOF COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 22 A 5. 
A major hindrance in this aspect of his learning is the 
teacher of God's fear about the validity of what he hears. 
And what 
he hears may indeed be quite startling. 
It may also seem to be 161 
irrelevant to the presented problem as he perceives it, and may, in 
fact, confront him 162 with a situation that appears to be very 
embarrassing. 
163 All these are judgments which have no value. 


They are his own, coming from the shabby self-perception that 164 he 
would leave behind. 
Judge not the words that come to you, but 
offer them in confidence. 
They are far wiser than your own. 
God's 
teachers have God's Word behind their symbols. 
And He Himself 
gives to the words they use the power of His Spirit, raising them 
from meaningless symbols to the call of Heaven itself. 


23. 
How Are Healing and Atonement Related? 

M 23 A l. 
Healing and Atonement are not related; they are identical. 

There is no order of difficulty in miracles because there are no 
degrees of Atonement. 
It is the one complete concept possible in 
this world, because it is the source of a wholly unified perception. 

Partial Atonement is a meaningless idea, just as special areas of hell 
in Heaven is 165 inconceivable. 
Accept Atonement and you are 
healed. 
Atonement is the Word of God. 
Accept His Word and what 
remains to make sickness possible? Accept His Word and every 
miracle has been accomplished. 
To forgive is to heal. 
The teacher of 
God has taken accepting the Atonement for himself as his only 
function. 
What is there then he cannot heal? What miracle can be 
withheld from him? M(54) 

M 23 A 2. 
The progress of the teacher of God may be slow or rapid, 
depending on whether he recognizes the Atonement's inclusiveness 
or for a time excludes some problem areas from it. 
In some cases. 



161 FIP adds “quite” which is also in the Notes. 


162 FIP changes “him” to “the teacher.” The Notes has “the teacher.” 

163 FIP adds “to him” and so does the Notes. 


164 FIP changes “that” to “which;” the Notes also has “which.” 

165 FIP changes “is” to “are” viewing the subject as the plural “special areas.” In fact the subject is the 
implied “[the idea of] special areas.” It’s not the “special areas” which are inconceivable, but the IDEA 
of them. 
The Notes has it as “is.” 


1715 


III-57 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


there is a sudden and complete awareness of the perfect 
applicability of the lesson of the 166 Atonement to all situations. 

This, 167 however, is comparatively rare. 
The teacher of God may 
have accepted the function God has given him long before he has 
learned all that his acceptance holds out to him. 
It is only the end 
that is certain. 
Anywhere along the way, 168 the necessary realization 
of inclusiveness may reach him. 
If the way seems long, let him be 
content. 
He has decided on the direction he will 169 take. 
What more 
is 170 asked of him? And having done what was required, would 
God withhold the rest? 

M 23 A 3. 
That forgiveness is healing needs to be understood, if the 
teacher of God is to make progress. 
The idea that a body can be sick 
is a central concept in the ego's thought system. 
This thought gives 
the body autonomy, separates it from the mind, and keeps the idea 
of attack inviolate. 
If the body could be sick Atonement would be 
impossible. 
A body that can order a mind to do as it sees fit could 171 
merely take the place of God and prove salvation is impossible. 

What then is left to heal? The body has become lord of the mind. 

How could the mind be returned to the Holy Spirit unless the body 
is killed? And who would want salvation at such a price? 

M 23 A 4. 
Certainly sickness does not appear to be a decision. 
Nor 
would anyone actually believe he wants to be sick. 
Perhaps he can 
accept the idea in theory, but it is rarely if ever consistently applied 
to all specific forms of sickness, both in the individual's perception 
of himself and of all others as well. 
Nor is it at this level that the 
teacher of God calls forth the miracle of healing. 
He overlooks the 


166 The word “the” is not present in the Urtext manuscript, but it is present in the Notes and in FIP. 
This 
is being regarded as an inadvertent omission. 


167 FIP replaces the period with a comma and then adds “but” and deletes “however.” The Notes is the 
same as FIP “... 
the Atonement to all situations, but this is comparatively rare.” 

168 Illegible handwritten mark-up suggests something, possibly “line” in place of “way.” FIP and the 
Notes are all the same here. 


169 FIP changes “will” to “wants to.” The Notes also has “wants to.” 

170 FIP replaces “is” with “was.” The Notes also has “was.” 

171 The Manuscript shows “could” handwritten above “would.” FIP chooses “could” which is also the 
reading in the Notes. 



III-58 


PROOF 


1716 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


mind and body, seeing only the Face of Christ shining in front of 
him, correcting all mistakes and healing all perception. 
Healing is 
the result of the recognition, by God's teacher, of Who it is that is in 
need of healing. 
This recognition has no special reference. 
It is true 
of all things that God created. 
In it are all illusions healed. 
M(55) 

M 23 A 5. 
When a teacher of God fails to heal, it is because he has 
forgotten Who he is. 
Another's sickness thus becomes his own. 
In 
allowing this to happen, he has identified with another's ego, and 
has thus confused him with a body. 
In so doing, he has refused to 
accept 172 Atonement for himself, and can hardly offer it to his 
brother in Christ's Name. 
He will, in fact, be unable to recognize his 
brother at all, for his Father did not create bodies, and so he is seeing 
in a 173 brother only the unreal. 
Mistakes do not correct mistakes, 
and distorted perception does not heal. 
Step back now, teacher of 
God. 
You have been wrong. 
Lead not the way, for you have lost it. 

Turn quickly to your Teacher, and let yourself be healed. 


M 23 A 6. 
The offer of Atonement is universal. 
It is equally 
applicable to all individuals in all circumstances. 
And in it is the 
power to heal all individuals of all forms of sickness. 
Not to believe 
this is to be unfair to God, and thus unfaithful to Him. 
A sick 
person perceives himself as separate from God. 
Would you see him 
as separate from you? It is your task to heal the sense of separation 
that has made him sick. 
It is your function to recognize for him that 
what he believes about himself is not the truth. 
174 It is your 
forgiveness that must show him this. 
Healing is very simple. 

Atonement is received and offered. 
Having been received, it must 
be accepted. 
It is in the receiving, then, that healing lies. 
All else 
must follow from this single purpose. 


M 23 A 7. 
Who can limit the power of God Himself? Who then can 
say who 175 can be healed of what, and what must 176 remain beyond 


172 FIP inserts “the” before “Atonement.” The Notes has no “the” here. 


173 FIP replaces “a brother” with “his brother.” The Notes has “his brother.” 

174 Handwritten mark-up suggests “true,” FIP keeps “the truth” and that is what the Notes has also. 


175 FIP replaces “who” with “which one.” The Notes has “who.” 


1717 


III-59 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


God's power to forgive? This is insanity indeed. 
It is not up to 
God's teachers to set limits upon Him, because it is not up to them 
to judge His Son. 
And to judge His Son is to limit his Father. 
Both 
are equally meaningless. 
Yet this will not be understood until God's 
teacher recognizes that they are the same mistake. 
Herein does he 
receive Atonement, for he withdraws his judgment from the Son of 
God, accepting him as God created him. 
No longer does he stand 
apart from God, determining where healing should be given and 
where it should be withheld. 
Now can he say with God, "This is my 
beloved Son, 177 created perfect and forever so." M(56) 

24. 
Does Jesus Have a Special Place in Healing? 

M 24 A l. 
God's gifts can rarely be received directly. 
Even the most 
advanced of God's teachers will give way to temptation in this 
world. 
Would it be fair if their pupils were denied healing because 
of this? The Bible says "Ask in the name of Jesus Christ." 178 Is this 
merely an appeal to magic? A name does not heal, nor does an 
invocation call forth any special power. 
What does it mean to call 
on Jesus Christ? What does calling on his Name confer? Why is the 
appeal to him part of healing? 

M 24 A 2. 
We have repeatedly stated 179 that one who has perfectly 
accepted the Atonement for himself can heal the world. 
Indeed, he 
has already done so. 
Temptation may recur to others, but never to 
this One. 
He has become the risen Son of God. 
He has overcome 
death because he has accepted Life. 
He has recognized himself as 
God created him, and in so doing he has recognized all living things 
as part of him. 
There is now no limit on his power, because it is the 
Power of God. 
So has his name become the Name of God, for he no 
longer sees himself as separate from Him. 



176 Handwritten mark-up suggests “must still.” Both FIP and the Notes have it as it is here. 


177 Matthew 17:5 While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them; and suddenly 
a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. 
Hear 
Him!” 

178 John 14:13-14 “And whatever you ask in My name, that I will do, that the Father may be glorified 
in the Son. 
If you ask anything in My name, I will do it.” 

179 FIP replaces “stated” with “said.” The Notes has “stated.” 


III-60 


1718 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 24 A 3. 
What does this mean to you? It means that in 
remembering Jesus you are remembering God. 
The whole 
relationship of the Son to the Father lies in him. 
His part in the 
Sonship is also yours, and his completed learning guarantees your 
own success. 
Is he still available for help? What did he say about 
this? Remember his promises, 180 and ask yourself honestly whether 
it is likely that 181 he will fail to keep them. 
Can God fail His Son? 
And can one who is one with God be unlike Him? Who transcends 
the body has transcended limitation. 
Would the greatest teacher be 
unavailable to those who follow him? 

M 24 A 4. 
The name of Jesus Christ as such is but a symbol. 
But it 
stands for love that is not of this world. 
It is a symbol that can safely 
be used 182 as a replacement for the many names of all the gods you 
pray to. 
183 It becomes the shining symbol for the Word of God, so 
close to What it stands for that the little space between the two is 
lost the moment that the Name is called to mind. 
Remembering His 
name is to M(57) give thanks for all the gifts that God has given you. 

And gratitude to God becomes the way in which He is remembered, 
for love cannot be far behind a grateful heart and thankful mind. 

God enters easily, for these are the true conditions for your coming 
home. 
184 

M 24 A 5. 
Jesus has led the way. 
Why would you not be grateful to 
him? He has asked for love, but only that he might give it to you. 

You do not love yourself. 
But in his eyes your loveliness is so 
complete and flawless that he sees in it an image of his Father. 
You 
become the symbol of his Father here on earth. 
To you he looks for 
hope, because in you he sees no limit and no stain to mar your 
beautiful perfection. 
In his eyes Christ's vision shines in perfect 


180 There are so many specific and general “promises” Jesus made in the Bible, to begin to cite them 
would require a separate book! Matthew 28:20 is apt however: “lo, I am with you always, even unto 
the end of the world.” 

181 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “that” which is also in the Notes although it is not originally 
typed in the manuscript. 


182 FIP changes “that can safely be used” to “that is safely used” which is the reading in the Notes. 


183 FIP changes “you pray to” to “to which you pray.” The Notes has “you pray to.” 

184 FIP replaces “coming home” with “homecoming.” The Notes has “coming home.” 


1719 


III-61 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


constancy. 
He has remained with you. 
Would you not learn the 
lesson of salvation through his learning? Why would you choose to 
start again, when he has made the journey for you? 

M 24 A 6. 
No-one on earth can grasp what Heaven is, or what its One 
Creator really means. 
Yet we have witnesses. 
It is to them that 
wisdom would 185 appeal. 
There have been those whose learning far 
exceeds what you 186 can learn. 
Nor would we teach the limitations 
we have laid on us. 
No-one who has become a true and dedicated 
teacher of God forgets his brothers. 
Yet what he can offer them is 
limited by what he learns himself. 
Then turn to one who laid all 
limits by, and went beyond the farthest reach of learning. 
He will 
take you with him, for he did not go alone. 
And you were with him 
then, as you are now. 


M 24 A 7. 
This course has come from him because his words have 
reached you in a language you can love and understand. 
Are other 
teachers possible, to lead the way to those who speak in different 
tongues and appeal to different symbols? Certainly there are. 


Would God leave anyone without a very present help in time of 
trouble; a Savior who can symbolize Himself? Yet do we need a 
many-faceted curriculum, not because of content differences but 
because symbols must shift and change to suit the need. 
Jesus has 
come to answer yours. 
In him you find God's Answer. 
Do you then 
teach with him, 187 for he is with you; he is always here. 
M(58) 

25. 
Is Reincarnation True? 

M 25 A 1 . 
In the ultimate sense, reincarnation is impossible. 
There is 
no past nor future, and the idea of birth into a body has no meaning 
either once or many times. 
Reincarnation cannot, then, be true in 
any real sense. 
Our only question should be, "Is the concept 
helpful?" And that depends, of course, on what it is used for. 
If it is 


185 FIP replaces “would” with “should.” The Notes has “... 
that wisdom sh would appeal.” It appears 
that Schucman began to write “should” then crossed out the “sh” and proceeded to write “would.” 

186 FIP changes “you” to “we.” The glyph used in the Notes is that most commonly used for “we” 
rather than “you.” 

187 Mathew 28:20 “lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.” 


III-62 


1720 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


used to strengthen the recognition of the eternal nature of life it is 
helpful indeed. 
Is any other question about it really useful in 
lighting up the way? Like many other beliefs, it can be bitterly 
misused. 
At least, such misuse offers preoccupation and perhaps 
pride in the past. 
At worst, it induces inertia in the present. 
In 
between, many kinds of folly are possible. 


M 25 A 2. 
Reincarnation would not, under any circumstances, be the 
problem to be dealt with now. 
If it were responsible for some of the 
difficulties the individual faces now, his task would still be only to 
escape from them now. 
If he is laying the groundwork for a future 
life, he can still work out his salvation only now. 
To some there may 
be comfort in the concept, and if it heartens them its value is self- 
evident. 
It is certain, however, that the way to salvation can be 
found by those who believe in reincarnation and by those who do 
not. 
The idea cannot, therefore, be regarded as essential to the 
curriculum. 
There is always some risk in seeing the present in terms 
of the past. 
There is always some good in any thought which 
strengthens the idea that life and the body are not the same. 


M 25 A 3. 
For our purposes, it would not be helpful to take any 
definite stand on reincarnation. 
A teacher of God should be as 
helpful to those who believe in it as to those who do not. 
If a 
definite stand on it 188 were required of him, it would merely limit his 
usefulness as well as his own decision-making. 
Our course is not 
concerned with any concept that is not acceptable to anyone, 
regardless of his formal beliefs. 
His ego will be enough for him to 
cope with, and it is not the 189 part of wisdom to add sectarian 
controversies to his burdens. 
Nor would there be an advantage in 
his premature acceptance of the course merely because it advocates 
a long-held belief of his own. 
M(59) 


188 FIP omits “on it.” The words “on it” are present in the Notes. 


189 The word “the” is not present in the Urtext manuscript; however it is present in FIP and in the Notes. 

We include it because its presence is clearly called for and its absence appears to be an inadvertent 
omission. 



1721 


III-63 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 25 A 4. 
It cannot be too strongly emphasized that this course aims 
at a complete reversal of thought. 
When this is finally accomplished 
issues such as the validity of reincarnation become meaningless. 

Until then they are likely to be merely controversial. 
The teacher of 
God is therefore wise to step away from all such questions, for he 
has much to teach and learn apart from them. 
He should both learn 
and teach that theoretical issues but waste time, draining it away 
from its appointed purpose. 
If there are aspects to any concept or 
belief that will be helpful, he will be told about it. 
He will also be 
told how to use it. 
What more need he know? 

M 25 A 5. 
Does this mean that the teacher of God should not believe 
in reincarnation himself, or discuss it with others who do? The 
answer 

is, certainly not. 
If he does believe in reincarnation, it would be a 
mistake for him to renounce the belief unless his Internal Teacher so 
advised. 
And this is most unlikely. 
He might be advised that he is 
misusing the belief in some way which 190 is detrimental to his 
pupil's advance or his own. 
Reinterpretation would then be 
recommended because it would be necessary. 
All that must be 
recognized, however, is 191 that birth was not the beginning and 
death is not the end. 
Yet even this much is not required of the 
beginner. 
He need merely accept the idea that what he knows is not 
necessarily all there is to learn. 
His journey has begun. 


M 25 A 6. 
The emphasis of this course always remains the same; - it 
is at this moment that complete salvation is offered you, and it is at 
this moment that you can accept it. 
This is still your one 
responsibility. 
Atonement might be equated with total escape from 
the past and total lack of interest in the future. 
Heaven is here. 


There is nowhere else. 
Heaven is now. 
There is no other time. 
No 
teaching that does not lead to this is of concern to God's teachers. 


All beliefs will point to this if properly interpreted. 
In this sense it 
can be said that their truth lies in their usefulness. 
All beliefs that 


190 FIP changes “which” to “that” which reflects the Notes. 


191 Urtext manuscript has “if’ here ... 
an obvious typo. 
The Notes and FIP both have “is.” 


III-64 


1722 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


lead to progress should be honored. 
This is the sole criterion this 
course requires. 
No more than this is necessary. 
M(60) 

26 . 
Are " Psychic" Powers Desirable? 

M 26 A 1 . 
The answer to this question is much like the preceding one. 

There are, of course, no "unnatural" powers, and it is obviously 
merely an appeal to magic to make up a power that does not exist. 


It is equally obvious, however, that each individual has many 
abilities of which he is unaware. 
As his awareness increases, he may 
well develop abilities that seem quite startling to him. 
Yet nothing 
that 192 he can do can compare even in the slightest with the glorious 
surprise of remembering Who he is. 
Let all his learning and all his 
effort 193 be directed toward this one great final surprise, and he will 
not be content to be delayed by the little ones that may come to him 
on the way. 


M 26 A 2. 
Certainly there are many "psychic" powers that are clearly 
in line with this course. 
Communication is not limited to the small 
range of channels the world recognizes. 
If it were there would be 
little point in trying to teach salvation. 
It would be impossible to do 
so. 
The limits the world places on communication is 194 the chief 
barrier to direct experience of the Holy Spirit, Whose Presence is 
always there and Whose Voice is available but for the hearing. 


These limits are placed out of fear, for without them the walls that 
surround all the separate places of the world would fall at the holy 
sound of His Voice . 
195 Who transcends these limits in any way is 
merely becoming more natural. 
He is doing nothing special, and 
there is no magic in his accomplishments. 



192 FIP omits “that” although it is present in the Notes. 


193 FIP changes “effort” to “efforts” but it is “effort” in the Notes. 


194 FIP changes “is” to “are” reading “the limits” as a plural subject. 
The Notes rather clearly has it the 
same as the Urtext manuscript. 
However, “limits” can be a single body of limitations which could be 
construed as a singular subject. 
This is a “noun clause” which can be singular, referring essentially to a 
singular “body of limits” as it were. 
We’re leaving it singular. 


195 Joshua 6:20 So the people shouted when the priests blew the trumpets. 
And it happened when the 
people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down 
flat. 
Then the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city. 



1723 


III -65 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 26 A 3. 
The seemingly new abilities that may be gathered on the 
way can be very helpful. 
Given to the Holy Spirit, and used under 
His direction, they are very 196 valuable teaching aids. 
To this, the 
question of how they arise is irrelevant. 
The only important 
consideration is how they are used. 
Taken 197 as ends in themselves, 
no matter how this is done, will delay progress. 
Nor does their 
value lie in proving anything; achievements from the past, unusual 
attunement with the "unseen," or special favors from God. 
God 
gives no special favors, and no-one has any powers that are not 
available to everyone. 
Only by tricks of magic are special powers 
"demonstrated." M(61) 

M 26 A 4. 
Nothing that is genuine is used to deceive. 
The Holy Spirit 
is incapable of deception, and He can use only genuine abilities. 

What is used for magic is useless to Him, but what He uses cannot 
be used for magic. 
There is, however, a particular appeal in unusual 
abilities which 198 can be curiously tempting. 
Here are strengths 
which the Holy Spirit wants and needs. 
Yet the ego sees in these 
same strengths an opportunity to glorify itself. 
Strengths turned to 
weakness are tragedy indeed. 
Yet what is not given to the Holy 
Spirit must be given to weakness, for what is withheld from love is 
given to fear, and will be fearful in consequence . 
199 
M 26 A 5. 
Even those who no longer value the material things of the 
world may still be deceived by "psychic" powers. 
As investment 
has been withdrawn from the world's material gifts the ego has 
been seriously threatened. 
It may still be strong enough to rally 
under this new temptation to win back strength by guile. 
Many 
have not seen through the ego's defenses here, although they are not 
particularly subtle. 
Yet, given a remaining wish to be deceived, 
deception is made easy. 
Now the "power" is no longer a genuine 
ability, and cannot be used dependably. 
It is almost inevitable that. 



196 FIP omits “very” although it is present in the Notes. 


197 pjp replaces “Taken” with “Taking them.” The Notes has “Taken.” 

198 FIP replaces “which” with “that” but the Notes has “which.” 

199 1 John 4:18 There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear involves torment. 

But he who fears has not been made perfect in love. 



III -66 


1724 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


unless the individual changes his mind about its purpose, he will 
bolster 200 its uncertainties with increasing deception. 


M 26 A 6. 
Any ability that anyone develops has the potentiality for 
good. 
To this there is no exception. 
And the more unusual and 
unexpected the power, the greater its 201 potential usefulness. 

Salvation has need of all abilities, for what the world would destroy 
the Holy Spirit would restore. 
"Psychic" abilities have been used to 
call upon the devil, which merely means to strengthen the ego. 
Yet 
here is also a great channel of hope and healing in the Holy Spirit's 
service. 
Those who have developed "psychic" powers have 
merely 202 let some of the limitations they laid upon their minds be 
lifted. 
It can be but greater 203 limitations they lay upon themselves if 
they utilize their increased freedom for further 204 imprisonment. 


The Holy Spirit needs these gifts, and those who offer them to Him 
and Him alone go with Christ's gratitude upon their hearts, and His 
holy sight not far behind. 
M(62) 

27 . 
Can God Be Reached Directly? 

M 27 A l. 
God indeed can be reached directly, for there is no distance 
between Him and His Son. 
His awareness is in everyone's memory 
and His Word is written on everyone's heart . 
205 Yet this awareness 
and this memory can arise across the threshold of the unconscious 206 
only where all barriers to truth have been removed. 
In how many is 
this the case? Here then is the role of God's teachers. 
They too have 
not attained the necessary understanding as yet, but they have 
joined with others. 
This is what sets them apart from the world. 



200 FIP adds “his “power’s”” but that is not present in the Notes. 


201 Urtext manuscript has “is,” but it should obviously be “its.” FIP agrees. 
The Notes has “its.” 

202 FIP replaces “merely” with “simply.” The Notes has “merely.” 

203 FIP replaces “greater limitations” with “further limitations.” The Notes has “grater burdens.” 

204 FIP replaces “further” with “greater.” The Notes has “further.” 

205 Jeremiah 31:33 “But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,” 
saith the LORD; “I will put my law in their inward parts, and in their heart will I write it; and I will be 
their God, and they shall be my people:” 

Romans 2:15 Who show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing 
witness, and between themselves their thoughts accusing or else excusing them. 


206 FIP replaces “the unconscious” with “recognition.” The Notes has “unconscious.” 


1725 


III -67 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


And it is this that enables others to leave the world with them. 


Alone they are nothing. 
But in their joining is the Power of God. 


M 27 A 2. 
There are those who have reached God directly, retaining 
no trace of worldly limits and remembering their own Identity 
perfectly. 
These might be called the Teachers of teachers because, 
although they are no longer visible, their image can yet be called 
upon. 
And they will appear when and where it is helpful for them 
to do so. 
To those to whom such appearances would be frightening, 
they give their ideas. 
No-one can call on them in vain. 
Nor is there 
anyone of whom they are unaware. 
All needs are known to them, 
and all mistakes are recognized and overlooked by them. 
The time 
will come when this is understood. 
And meanwhile, they give all 
their gifts to the teachers of God who look to them for help, asking 
all things in Their Name and in no other. 


M 27 A 3. 
Sometimes a teacher of God may have a brief experience of 
direct union with God. 
In this world, it is almost impossible that 
this endure. 
It can, perhaps, be won after much devotion and 
dedication, and then be maintained for most 207 of the time on earth. 

But this is so rare that it cannot be considered a realistic goal. 
If it 
happens, so be it. 
If it does not happen, so be it as well. 
All worldly 
states must be illusory. 
If God were reached directly in sustained 
awareness, the body would not be long maintained. 
Those who 
have laid the body down merely to extend their helpfulness to those 
remaining behind are few indeed. 
And they need helpers who are 
still in bondage and still asleep, so that by their awakening can 
God's Voice be heard. 
M(63) 

M 27 A 4. 
Do not despair, then, because of limitations. 
It is your 
function to escape from them, but not to be without them. 
If you 
would be heard by those who suffer, you must speak their 
language. 
If you would be Saviors, you must understand what 
needs to be escaped. 
Salvation is not theoretical. 
Behold the 
problem, ask for the answer, and then accept the answer 208 when it 

207 Handwritten mark-up suggests and FIP replaces “most” with “much.” The Notes has “most.” 

208 FIP replaces “the answer” with “it.” The Notes has “the answer.” 


III -68 


1726 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


comes. 
Nor will its coming be long delayed. 
All the help you can 
accept will be provided, and not one need you have will not be met. 

Let us not, then, be too concerned with goals for which you are not 
ready. 
God takes you where you are and welcomes you. 
What 
more could you desire, when this is all you need? 

28. 
What Is Death? 

M 28 A l. 
Death is the central dream from which all illusions stem. 
Is 
it not madness to think of life as being born, aging, losing vitality, 
and dying in the end? We have asked this question before, but now 
we need to consider it still 209 more carefully. 
It is the one fixed, 
unchangeable belief of the world that all things in it are born only to 
die. 
This is regarded as "the way of nature," not to be raised to 
question, but to be accepted as the "natural" law of life. 
The 
cyclical, the changing and unsure; the undependable and the 
unsteady, waxing and waning in a certain way upon a certain path, 

- all this is taken as the Will of God. 
And no-one asks if a benign 
Creator could will this. 


M 28 A 2. 
In this perception of the universe as God created it, it 
would not be possible 210 to think of Him as loving. 
For who decreed 
that all things pass away, ending in dust and disappointment and 
despair, can 211 but be feared. 
He holds your little life in his hand but 
by a thread, ready to break it off without regret or care, perhaps 
today. 
Or if he waits, yet is the ending certain. 
Who loves such a 
god knows not of love, because he has denied that life is real. 
Death 
has become life's symbol. 
His world is now a battleground, where 
contradiction reigns and opposites make endless war. 
Where there 
is death is peace impossible. 
M(64) 

M 28 A 3. 
Death is the symbol of the fear of God. 
His Love is blotted 
out in the idea, which holds It from awareness like a shield held 212 to 


209 FIP omits “still” however it is present in the Notes. 


210 FIP replaces “would not be possible” with “would be impossible.” The Notes has “would not be 
possible.” 

211 Handwritten mark-up suggests “could” in place of “can.” The Notes has “can.” 

212 FIP changes “shield held” to “shield held up.” The Notes has “shield held.” 


1727 


III -69 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


obscure the sun. 
The grimness of the symbol is enough to show it 
cannot co-exist with God. 
It holds an image of the Son of God in 
which he is "laid to rest" in devastation's arms, where worms 
await 213 to greet him and to last a little while by his destruction. 
Yet 
the worms as well are doomed to be destroyed as certainly. 
And so 
do all things live because of death. 
Devouring is nature's "law of 
life." God is insane, and fear alone is real. 


M 28 A 4. 
The curious belief that there is part of dying things that 
may go on apart from what will die does not proclaim a loving God, 
nor re-establish any grounds for trust. 
If death is real for anything 
there is no life. 
Death denies life. 
But if there is reality in life, death 
is denied. 
No compromise in this is possible. 
There is either a god 
of fear or One of Love. 
The world attempts a thousand 
compromises, and will attempt a thousand more. 
Not one can be 
acceptable to God's teachers, because not one could be acceptable to 
God. 
He did not make death because He did not make fear. 
Both 
are equally meaningless to Him. 


M 28 A 5. 
The "reality" of death is firmly rooted in the belief that 
God's Son is a body. 
And if God created bodies, death would 
indeed be real. 
But God would not be loving. 
There is no point at 
which the contrast between the perception of the real world and that 
of the world of illusions becomes more sharply evident. 
Death is 
indeed the death of God, if He is Love. 
And now His Own creation 
must stand in fear of Him. 
He is not Father but destroyer. 
He is not 
Creator but avenger. 
Terrible His Thoughts and fearful His image. 

To look on His creations is to die. 
M(65) 

M 28 A 6. 
"And the last to be overcome will be death." 214 Of course! 
Without the idea of death there is no world. 
All dreams will end 
with this one. 
This is salvation's final goal; the end of all illusions. 

And in death are all illusions born. 
What can be born of death and 
still have life? But what is born of God and still can die? The 
inconsistencies, the compromises and the rituals the world fosters in 

213 FIP changes “await” to “wait.” The Notes has “await.” 

214 1 Corinthians 15:26 “The last enemy that shall be abolished is death.” (ASV) 


III -70 


1728 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


its vain attempts to cling to death and yet to think love real are 
mindless magic, ineffectual and meaningless. 
God is, and in Him all 
created things must be eternal. 
Do you not see that otherwise He 
has an opposite, and fear would be as real as love? 

M 28 A 7. 
Teacher of God, your one assignment could be stated thus: 
Accept no compromise in which death plays a part. 
Do not believe 
in cruelty, nor let attack conceal the truth from you. 
What seems to 
die has 215 been misperceived and carried 216 to illusion. 
Now it 
becomes your task to let the illusion be carried 217 to the truth. 
Be 
steadfast but in this; be not deceived by the "reality" of any 
changing form. 
Truth neither moves nor wavers nor sinks down to 
death and dissolution. 
And what is the end of death? Nothing but 
this; the realization that the Son of God is guiltless now and forever. 

Nothing but this. 
But do not let yourself forget it is not less than 
this. 
M(66) 

29. 
What Is The Resurrection? 

M 29 A 1 . 
Very simply, the resurrection is the overcoming or 
surmounting of death. 
It is a reawakening or a rebirth; a change of 
mind about the meaning of the world. 
It is the acceptance of the 
Holy Spirit's interpretation of the world's purpose; the acceptance of 
the Atonement for oneself. 
It is the end of dreams of misery and the 
glad awareness of the Holy Spirit's final dream. 
It is the recognition 
of the gifts of God. 
It is the dream in which the body functions 
perfectly, having no function except communication. 
It is the lesson 
in which learning ends, for it is consummated and surpassed with 
this. 
It is the invitation to God to take His final step. 
It is the 
relinquishment of all other purposes, all other interests, all other 
wishes and all other concerns. 
It is the single desire of the Son for 
the Father. 



215 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “but” here. 
The word “but” is not present in the Notes. 


216 Handwritten mark-up offers “brought” as a substitute for “carried.” The Notes has “carried” and so 
does FIP. 


217 ibid 


1729 


III -71 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 29 A 2. 
The resurrection is the denial of death, being the assertion 
of life. 
Thus is all the thinking of the world reversed entirely. 
Life is 
now recognized as salvation, and pain and misery of any kind 
perceived as hell. 
Love is no longer feared but gladly welcomed. 

Idols have disappeared, and the remembrance of God shines 
unimpeded across the world. 
Christ's face is seen in every living 
thing, and nothing is held in darkness apart from the light of 
forgiveness. 
There is no sorrow still upon the earth. 
The joy of 
Heaven has come upon it. 


M 29 A 3. 
Here the curriculum ends. 
From here on no directions are 
needed. 
Vision is wholly corrected and all mistakes undone. 
Attack 
is meaningless and peace has come. 
The goal of the curriculum has 
been achieved. 
Thoughts turn to Heaven and away from hell. 
All 
longings are satisfied, for what remains unanswered or incomplete? 
The last illusion spreads over 218 the world, forgiving all things and 
replacing all attack. 
The whole reversal is accomplished. 
Nothing is 
left to contradict the Word of God. 
There is no opposition to the 
truth. 
And now the truth can come at last. 
How quickly will it 
come as it is asked to enter and envelop such a world! M(67) 

M 29 A 4. 
All living hearts are tranquil, with a stir of deep 
anticipation, for the time of everlasting things is now at hand. 
There 
is no death. 
The Son of God is free. 
And in His freedom is the end 
of fear. 
No hidden places now remain on earth to shelter sick 
illusions, dreams of fear and misperceptions of the universe. 
All 
things are seen in light, and in the light their purpose is transformed 
and understood. 
And we, God's children, rise up from the dust and 
look upon our perfect sinlessness. 
The song of Heaven sounds 
around the world, as it is lifted up and brought to truth. 


M 29 A 5. 
Now there are no distinctions. 
Differences have 
disappeared and Love looks on Itself. 
What further sight is needed? 
What remains that vision could accomplish? We have seen the face 
of Christ, His sinlessness. 
His Love behind all forms, beyond all 


218 FIP replaces “over” with “across.” The Notes has “over.” 


III -72 


1730 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


purposes. 
Holy are we because His Holiness has set us free indeed! 
And we accept His Holiness as ours; as it is. 
As God created us so 
will we be forever and forever, and we wish for nothing but His 
Will to be our own. 
Illusions of another will are 219 lost, for unity of 
purpose has been found. 


M 29 A 6. 
These things await us all, but we are not prepared as yet to 
welcome them with joy. 
As long as any mind remains possessed of 
evil dreams the thought of hell is real. 
God's teachers have the goal 
of wakening the minds of those asleep, and seeing there the vision 
of Christ's face to take the place of what they dream. 
220 The thought 
of murder is replaced with blessing. 
Judgment is laid by, and given 
Him Whose function judgment is. 
And in His final judgment is 
restored the truth about the holy Son of God. 
He is redeemed, for 
he has heard God's Word and understood Its meaning. 
He is free 
because he let God's Voice proclaim the truth. 
And all he sought 
before to crucify are resurrected with him, by his side as he prepares 
with them to meet his God. 
M(68) 

30. 
As For The Rest 

M 30 A 1 . 
This manual is not intended to answer all questions which 
both teacher and pupil may raise. 
In fact, it covers only a few of the 
more obvious ones, in terms of a brief summary of some of the 
major concepts in the text and workbook. 
It is not a substitute for 
either, but merely a supplement. 
While it is called a manual for 
teachers, it must be remembered that only time divides teacher and 
pupil, so that the difference is temporary by definition. 
In some 
cases, it may be helpful for the pupil to read the manual first. 


Others might do better to begin with the workbook. 
Still others may 
need to start at the more abstract level of the text. 



219 Urtext manuscript has “is,” FIP corrects the agreement in number problem as we have with “are.” 
Notes clearly has “is” also. 
It is possible that “Illusions of another will” should be considered a “noun 
clause” which could be construed as singular. 
We can for instance think of this one thing called “our 
illusions of another will” which is capable of being lost. 
However it seems more likely that this is just 
an error and “are” is what was intended. 


220 Urtext manuscript has “dreamed” but handwritten mark-up and FIP replace that with “dream.” 
Given that the rest of the paragraph is in the present tense, this seems to be an appropriate correction. 

The Notes also has “dream.” 


1731 


III -73 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 30 A 2. 
Which is for whom? 221 Who would profit more from 
prayers alone? Who needs but a smile, being as yet unready for 
more? No-one should attempt to answer these questions alone. 

Surely no teacher of God has come this far without realizing that. 

The curriculum is highly individualized. 
And all aspects are under 
the Holy Spirit's particular care and guidance. 
Ask and He will 
answer. 
The responsibility is His, and He alone is fit to assume it. 


To do so is His function. 
To refer the questions to Him is yours. 

Would you want to be responsible for decisions about which you 
understand so little? Be glad you have a Teacher Who cannot make 
a mistake. 
His answers are always right. 
Would you say that of 
yours? 

M 30 A 3. 
There is another advantage,- and a very important one, - 
in referring decisions to the Holy Spirit with increasing frequency. 

Perhaps you have not thought of this aspect, but its centrality is 
obvious. 
To follow the Holy Spirit's guidance is to let yourself be 
absolved of guilt. 
It is the essence of the Atonement. 
It is the core of 
the curriculum. 
The imagined usurping of functions not your own 
is the basis of fear. 
The whole world you see reflects the illusion 
you have done so, making fear inevitable. 
To return the function to 
the One To Whom it belongs is thus the escape from fear. 
And it is 
this that lets the memory of love return to M(69) you. 
Do not, then, 
think that following the Holy Spirit's guidance is necessary merely 
because of your own inadequacies. 
It is the way out of hell for you. 

M 30 A 4. 
Here again is the paradox often referred to in the course. 


To say, "Of myself I can do nothing" 222 is to gain all power. 
And yet 
it is but a seeming paradox. 
As God created you, you have all 
power. 
The image you made of yourself has none. 
The Holy Spirit 
knows the truth about you. 
The image you made does not. 
Yet, 
despite its obvious and complete ignorance, this image assumes it 
knows all things because you have given that belief to it. 
Such is 

221 FIP replaces “whom” with “which.” The Notes has “which” also. 


222 John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, “Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do 
nothing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like 
manner.” 


III -74 


1732 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


your teaching and the teaching of the world which was made to 
uphold it. 
But the Teacher Who knows the truth has not forgotten 
it. 
His decisions bring benefit to all, being wholly devoid of attack. 

And therefore incapable of arousing guilt. 


M 30 A 5. 
Who assumes a power that he does not have 223 is deceiving 
himself. 
Yet to accept the power given him by God is but to 
acknowledge his Creator and accept His gifts. 
And His gifts have 
no limit. 
To ask the Holy Spirit to decide for you is merely 224 to 
accept your true inheritance. 
Does this mean that you cannot say 
anything without consulting Him? No, indeed! That would hardly 
be practical, and it is the practical with which this course is most 
concerned. 
If you have made it a habit to ask for help when and 
where you can, you can be confident that wisdom will be given you 
when you need it. 
Prepare for this each morning, remember God 
when you can throughout the day, ask the Holy Spirit's help when it 
is feasible to do so, and thank Him for His guidance at night. 
And 
your confidence will be well founded indeed. 
M(70) 

M 30 A 6. 
Never forget that the Holy Spirit does not depend on your 
words. 
He understands the requests of your heart and answers 
them. 
Does this mean that, while attack remains attractive to you 
He will respond with evil? Hardly! For God has given Him the 
power to translate your prayers of the heart into His language. 
225 
He understands that an attack is a call for help. 
And He responds 
with help accordingly. 
God would be cruel if He let your words 
replace His Own. 
A loving father does not let his child harm 
himself or choose his own destruction. 
He may ask for injury, but 
his father will protect him still. 
And how much more than this does 
your Father love His Son? 


223 FIP replaces “have” with “possess.” In the Notes we find the glyph for “have.” 

224 FIP replaces “merely” with “simply.” The Notes has “merely.” 

225 Romans 8:26 Likewise the Spirit also helps in our weaknesses. 
For we do not know what we should 
pray for as we ought, but the Spirit Himself makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be 
uttered. 



PROOF 1733 COPY 



Volume III Manual for Teachers 


M 30 A 7. 
Remember you are His completion and His Love. 

Remember your weakness is His strength. 
226 But do 227 not read this 
hastily or wrongly. 
If His strength is in you, what you perceive as 
your weakness is but illusion. 
And He has given you the means to 
prove it so. 
Ask all things of His Teacher, and all things are given 
you. 
Not in the future but immediately; now. 
God does not wait, 
for waiting implies time and He is timeless. 
Forget your foolish 
images, your sense of frailty and your fear of harm, your dreams of 
danger and selected "wrongs." God knows but His Son, and as he 
was created so he is. 
In confidence I place you in His Hands, and I 
give thanks for you that this is so. 


M 30 A 8. 
And now in all your doings be you blessed. 


God turns to you for help to save the world. 


Teacher of God, His thanks He offers you, 

And all the world stands silent in the grace 
You bring from Him. 
You are the Son He loves, 

And it is given you to be the means 

Through which His Voice is heard around the world 

To close all things of time, to end the sight 

Of all things visible; and to undo 

All things that change. 
Through you is ushered in 

A world unseen, unheard, yet tndy there. 


Holy are you, and in your light the world M(7l) 

Reflects your holiness, for you are not 
Alone and friendless. 
I give thanks for you, 

And join your efforts on behalf of God, 

Knowing they are on my behalf as well 
And for all those who walk to God with me. 



FINIS 228 


226 2 Corinthians 12:9 And He said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made 
perfect in weakness.” Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of 
Christ may rest upon me. 


227 The word “do” is not present in the Urtext manuscript, nor is it handwritten in. 
FIP includes it and it 
appears to be a necessary correction. 
It is clearly present in the Notes. 


228 pjp replaces “FINIS” with “AMEN” however neither word appears in the Notes which simply ends 
with no comment. 



III-76 


1734 


PROOF 


COPY 



Urtext Volume IV - Use of Terms 


1735 

PROOF COPY 


PROOF 1736 COPY 


Urtext Volume IV - Use of Terms 


Table of Contents 

URTEXT VOLUME IV - USE OF TERMS . 
I 

1. 
Introduction.1 

2. 
Mind-Spirit.2 

3. 
The Ego-The Miracle.3 

4. 
Forgiveness - The Face of Christ.5 

5. 
Perception - Knowledge.7 

6. 
Jesus - Christ. 


7. 
The Holy Spirit 

8. 
Epilogue. 



1737 


PROOF 


COPY 


IV-iii 


^ SO 











IV-iv 


PROOF 1738 COPY 


Urtext Volume IV - Use of Terms 


1. 
Introduction 

U 1 A 1. 
This is not a course in theoretical philosophy, nor is it 
concerned with precise terminology in connection with origins. 
It is 
concerned only with Atonement, or the correction of perception. 


The means of the Atonement is forgiveness. 
The structure of 
"individual consciousness" is essentially irrelevant, because it is a 
concept representing the "original error" or the "original sin." To 
study the error itself does not lead to correction, if you are indeed to 
succeed in overlooking the error. 
And it is just this process of 
overlooking at which the course aims. 


U 1 A 2. 
All terms are potentially controversial, and those who seek 
controversy will find it. 
Yet those who seek clarification will find it 
as well. 
They must, however, be willing to overlook controversy, 
recognizing that it is a defense against truth in the form of a 
delaying maneuver. 
Theological considerations as such are 
necessarily controversial, since they depend on belief and can 
therefore be accepted or rejected. 
A universal theology is 
impossible, but a universal experience is not only possible but 
necessary. 
It is this experience toward which the course is directed. 

Here alone consistency becomes possible because here alone 
uncertainty ends. 


U 1 A 3. 
This course remains within the ego framework, where it is 
needed. 
It is not concerned with what is beyond all error because it 
is planned only to set the direction toward it. 
Therefore it uses 
words, which are symbolic, and cannot express what lies beyond 
symbols. 
It is always the ego that questions because it is only the 
ego that doubts. 
The course merely gives another Answer, once a 
question has been raised. 
However, this Answer does not attempt 
to resort to inventiveness or ingenuity. 
These are attributes of the 
ego. 
THE COURSE IS SIMPLE. 
It has one function and one goal. 

Only in that does it remain wholly consistent because only that can 
BE consistent. 



1739 


IV-1 


Volume IV Use of Terms 


U 1 A 4. 
The ego will demand many answers this course does not 
give. 
It does not recognize as questions the mere form of a question 
to which an answer is impossible. 
The ego may ask, "How did the 
impossible occur?", "To what did the impossible happen?", and may 
ask 1 in many forms. 
Yet there is no answer; only an experience. 


Seek only this, and do not let theology delay you. 
(2) 

U 1 A 5. 
You will notice that the emphasis on structural issues in 
the course is brief and early. 
Afterwards and soon, it drops away to 
make way for the central teaching. 
Since you have asked for 
clarification, however, these are some of the terms that are used. 
2 

2. 
Mind-Spirit 

U 2 A 1. 
The term "mind" is used to represent the activating agent 
of Spirit, supplying its creative energy. 
When the term is capitalized 
it refers to God or Christ (i.e., the Mind of God or the Mind of 
Christ). 
Spirit is the Thought of God which He created like Himself. 

The unified Spirit is God's one Son, or Christ. 


U 2 A 2. 
In this world, because the mind is split, the Sons of God 
appear to be separate. 
Nor do their minds seem to be joined. 
In this 
illusory state, the concept of an "individual mind” seems to be 
meaningful. 
It is therefore described in the course AS IF it has two 
parts; spirit and ego. 


U 2 A 3. 
Spirit is the part that is still in contact with God through 
the Holy Spirit, Who abides in this part but sees the other part as 
well. 
The term "soul” is not used except in direct Biblical quotations 
because of its highly controversial nature. 
It would, however, be an 
equivalent of "spirit," with the understanding that, being of God, it 
is eternal and was never born. 


U 2 A 4. 
The other part of the mind is entirely illusory and makes 
only illusions. 
Spirit retains the potential for creating, but its Will 
which is God's, seems to be imprisoned while the mind is not 


1 Handwritten markup inserts “this.” 

2 Originally a colon appears here in the Urtext manuscript. 
In the Notes there is no colon and the 
sentence is “Since you have asked for clarification, however, these are some of the terms that are used 
in the beginning.” 


IV-2 


1740 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


unified. 
Creation continues unabated because that is the Will of 
God. 
This Will is always unified, and therefore has no meaning in 
this world. 
It has no opposite and no degrees. 


U 2 A 5. 
The mind can be right or wrong, depending on the voice to 
which it listens. 
RIGHT-MINDEDNESS listens to the Holy Spirit, 
forgives the world, and through Christ's vision sees the real world 
in its place. 
This is the final vision, the last perception, the condition 
in which God takes the final step Himself. 
Here time and illusions 
end together. 
3 WRONG-MINDEDNESS listens to the ego and 
makes illusions; perceiving sin and justifying anger, and seeing 
guilt, disease and death as real. 
Both this world and the real world 
are illusions because right-mindedness merely overlooks, or 
forgives, what never happened. 
U(3) Therefore it is not the ONE- 
MINDEDNESS of the Christ Mind, Whose Will is One with God’s. 


U 2 A 6. 
In this world the only remaining freedom is the freedom of 
choice; this choice is always between two choices or two voices. 


Will is not involved in perception at any level, and has nothing to do 
with choice. 
CONSCIOUSNESS is the receptive mechanism, 
receiving messages from above or below; from the Holy Spirit or the 
ego. 
Consciousness has levels and awareness can shift quite 
dramatically, but it cannot transcend the perceptual realm. 
At its 
highest it becomes aware of the real world, and can be trained to do 
so increasingly. 
Yet the very fact that it has levels and can be 
trained demonstrates that consciousness cannot reach knowledge. 

U(4) 

3 . 
The Ego- The Miracle 

U 3 A 1. 
Illusions will not last. 
Their death is sure and this alone is 
certain in their world. 
It is the ego's world because of this. 
What is 
the ego? But a dream of what you really are. 
A thought you are 
apart from your Creator and a wish to be what He created not. 
It is 
a thing of madness, not reality at all. 
A name for namelessness is all 
it is. 
A symbol of impossibility; a choice for options that do not 


3 Handwritten mark-up suggests paragraph break here. 



1741 


IV-3 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


exist. 
We call it that to help us understand that it is nothing but an 
ancient thought that what is made has immortality. 
But what could 
come of this except a dream which, like all dreams, could only die? 

U 3 A 2. 
What is the ego? Nothingness, but in a form that seems like 
something. 
In a world of form the ego cannot be denied for it alone 
seems real. 
How could God's Son as He created him abide in form 
or in a world of form? Who asks you to define the ego and explain 
how it arose can be but he who thinks it real, and seeks by definition 
to ensure that its illusive nature is concealed behind the words that 
seem to make it so. 


U 3 A 3. 
There is no definition for a lie that serves to make it true. 

Nor can there be a truth that lies conceal effectively. 
The ego's 
unreality is not denied by words nor is its meaning clear because its 
nature seems to have a form. 
Who can define the undefinable? And 
yet there is an answer even here. 


U 3 A 4. 
We cannot really make a definition for what the ego is, but 
we CAN say what it is not. 
And this is shown to us with perfect 
clarity. 
It is from this that we deduce all that the ego is. 
Look at its 
opposite and you can see the only answer that is meaningful. 


U 3 A 5. 
The ego's opposite in every way,~in origin, effect and 
consequence—we call a miracle. 
And here we find all that is not the 
ego in the world. 
Here is the ego's opposite and here alone we look 
on what the ego was. 
For here we see all that it seemed to do, and 
cause and its effects must still be one. 


U 3 A 6. 
Where there was darkness now we see the light. 
What was 
the ego? What the darkness was. 
Where was the ego? Where the 
darkness was. 
What is it now and where can it be found? Nothing 
and nowhere. 
Now the light has come: Its opposite has gone 
without a trace. 
Where evil was there U(5) now is holiness. 
What is 
the ego? What the evil was. 
Where is the ego? In an evil dream that 
but seemed real while you were dreaming it. 
Where there was 
crucifixion stands God's Son. 
What is the ego? Who has need to 
ask? Where is the ego? Who has need to seek for an illusion now 
that dreams are gone? 

IV -4 1742 

PROOF COPY 


Volume IV Use of Terms 


U 3 A 7. 
What is a MIRACLE? A dream as well. 
But look at all the 
aspects of THIS dream, and you will never question any more. 


Look at the kindly world you see stretched forth before you as you 
walk in gentleness. 
Look at the helpers all along the way you travel, 
happy in the hope of Heaven and the certainty of peace. 
And look 
an instant, too, on what you left behind at last and finally passed by. 


U 3 A 8. 
This was the ego — all the cruel hate, the need for 
vengeance and the cries of pain, the fear of dying and the urge to 
kill, the brotherless illusion and the self that seemed alone in all the 
universe. 
This terrible mistake about yourself the miracle corrects as 
gently as a loving mother sings her child to rest. 
Is not a song like 
this what you would hear? Would it not answer all you thought to 
ask, and even make the question meaningless? 

U 3 A 9. 
Your questions have no answer, being made to still God's 
Voice, which asks of everyone one question only: 

"Are you ready yet to help Me save the world?" 

Ask this instead of what the ego is, and you will see a sudden 
brightness cover up the world the ego made. 
No miracle is now 
withheld from anyone. 
The world is saved from what you thought 
it was. 
And what it is, is wholly uncondemned and wholly pure. 


U 3 A 10. 
The miracle forgives; the ego damns. 
Neither need be 
defined except by this. 
Yet could a definition be more sure, or more 
in line with what salvation asks? Problem and answer lie together 
here, and having met at last the choice is clear. 
Who chooses hell 
when it is recognized? And who would not go on a little while when 
it is given him to understand the way is short and Heaven is his 
goal? U(6) 

4 . 
Forgiveness - The Face of Christ 

U 4 A 1. 
Forgiveness is for God and toward God but not of Him. 
It 
is impossible to think of anything He created that could need 
forgiveness. 
Forgiveness, then, is an illusion, but because of its 
purpose, which is the Holy Spirit's, it has one difference. 
Unlike all 
other illusions it leads away from error and not toward it. 



1743 


IV-5 


Volume IV Use of Terms 


U 4 A 2. 
Forgiveness might be called a kind of happy fiction; a way 
in which the unknowing can bridge the gap between their 
perception and the truth. 
They cannot go directly from perception 
to knowledge because they do not think it is their will to do so. 
This 
makes God appear to be an enemy instead of what He really is. 


And it is just this insane perception that makes them unwilling 
merely to rise up and to return to Him in peace. 


U 4 A 3. 
And so they need an illusion of Help because they are 
helpless; a Thought of peace because they are in conflict. 
God 
knows what His Son needs before he asks. 
4 He is not at all 
concerned with form, but having given the content it is His Will that 
it be understood. 
And that suffices. 
The form adapts itself to need; 
the content is unchanging, as eternal as its Creator. 


U 4 A 4. 
THE FACE OF CHRIST has to be seen before the memory 
of God can return. 
The reason is obvious. 
Seeing the Face of Christ 
is perception. 
No-one can look on knowledge. 
But the Face of 
Christ is 5 the great symbol of forgiveness. 
It is salvation. 
It is the 
symbol of the real world. 
Whoever looks on this no longer sees the 
world. 
He is as near to Heaven as is possible outside the gate. 
6 Yet 
from this gate it is no more than just a step inside. 
It is the final step. 

And this we leave to God. 


U 4 A 5. 
It 7 is a symbol, too, but as the symbol of His Will alone it 
cannot be divided. 
And so the Unity that it reflects becomes His 
Will. 
It is the only thing still in the world in part, and yet the bridge 
to Heaven. 
U(7) 

U 4 A 6. 
God's Will is all there is. 
We can but go from nothingness 
to everything; from hell to Heaven. 
Is this a journey? No, not in 
truth, for truth goes nowhere. 
But illusions shift from place to place; 


4 Matthew 6:8 “Therefore do not be like them. 
For your Father knows the things you have need of 
before you ask Him.” 

5 Handwritten mark-up suggests “involves” which FIP adopts. 
The Notes does not include the word 
“involves.” 

6 Genesis 28:17 “And he was afraid and said, ‘How awesome is this place! This is none other than the 
house of God, and this is the gate of heaven!’” 

7 Handwritten mark-up suggests “forgiveness” which FIP adopts. 
The Notes has it as it is here, but has 
no paragraph break. 



IV-6 


1744 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


from time to time. 
The final step is also but a shift. 
As a perception 
it is partly unreal. 
And yet this part will vanish. 
What remains is 
peace eternal and the Will of God. 


U 4 A 7. 
There are no wishes now for wishes change. 
Even the 
wished-for can become unwelcome. 
That must be so because the 
ego cannot be at peace. 
But Will is constant, as the gift of God. 
And 
what He gives is always like Himself. 
This is the purpose of the 
Face of Christ. 
It is the gift of God to save His Son. 
But look on this 
and you have been forgiven. 


U 4 A 8. 
How lovely does the world become in just that single 
instant when you see the truth about yourself reflected there. 
Now 
you are sinless and behold your sinlessness. 
Now you are holy and 
perceive it so. 
And now the mind returns to its Creator; the joining 
of the Father and the Son, the Unity of unities that stands behind all 
joining but still beyond them all. 
God IS NOT SEEN BUT ONLY 
UNDERSTOOD. 
His Son is not attacked but recognized. 


5. 
Perception - Knowledge 

U 5 A 1. 
The world you see is an illusion of a world. 
God did not 
create it, for what He creates must be eternal as Himself. 
Yet there is 
nothing in the world you see that will endure forever. 
Some things 
will last in time a little while longer than others. 
But the time will 
come when all things visible will have an end. 


U 5 A 2. 
The body's eyes are therefore not the means by which the 
real world can be seen, for the illusions that they look upon must 
lead to more illusions of reality. 
8 And so they do. 
For everything 
they see not only will not last, but lends itself to thoughts of sin and 
guilt. 
While everything that God created is forever without sin and 
therefore is forever without guilt. 


U 5 A 3. 
Knowledge is not the remedy for false perception since, 
being another level, they can never meet. 
The one correction 
possible for false perception must be true perception . 
U(8) It will 


Urtext Manuscript has, in brackets “of reality” here. 
FIP omits the brackets as does the Notes. 



1745 


IV-7 




Volume IV Use of Terms 


not endure. 
But for the time it lasts it comes to heal. 
For true 
perception is a remedy with many names. 
Forgiveness, salvation. 

Atonement, true perception, all are one. 
They are the 9 one 
beginning with the end to lead to Oneness far beyond themselves. 

True perception is the means by which the world is saved from sin, 
for sin does not exist. 
And it is this that true perception sees. 


U 5 A 4. 
The world stands like a block before Christ's face. 
But true 
perception looks on it as nothing more than just a fragile veil, so 
easily dispelled that it can last no longer than an instant. 
It is seen at 
last for only what it is. 
And now it cannot fail to disappear, for now 
there is an empty place made clean and ready. 
Where destruction 
was perceived the face of Christ appears, and in that instant is the 
world forgot, with time forever ended as the world spins into 
nothingness from where it came. 


U 5 A 5. 
A world forgiven cannot last. 
It was the home of bodies. 

But forgiveness looks past bodies. 
This is its holiness; this is how it 
heals. 
The world of bodies is the world of sin, for only if there is a 
body is sin possible. 
From sin comes guilt as surely as forgiveness 
takes all guilt away. 
And once all guilt is gone what more remains 
to keep a separated world in place? For place has gone as well, 
along with time. 
Only the body makes the world seem real, for 
being separate it could not remain where separation is impossible. 

Forgiveness proves it is impossible because it sees it not. 
And what 
you then will overlook will not be understandable to you, just as 
its 10 presence once had been your certainty. 


U 5 A 6. 
This is the shift that true perception brings: What was 
projected out is seen within, and there forgiveness lets it disappear. 

For there the altar to the Son is set, and there his Father is 
remembered. 
Here are all illusions brought to truth and laid upon 
the altar. 
What is seen outside must lie beyond forgiveness, for it 


9 The Urtext manuscript has “a” crossed out and “the” handwritten in. 
The Notes has “a.” 

10 The Urtext Manuscript has “just as its opposite was once your certainty” which, since “its” refers to 
“sin” appears to be an error. 
Immediately after this is typed “presence once had been your certainty” 
which appears to make more sense. 
FIP retains only the second reading. 
In the Notes we find the 
substitution of “presence” for “opposite.” 


IV-8 


1746 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


seems to be forever sinful. 
Where is hope while sin is seen as 
outside? What remedy can guilt expect? But seen within your mind, 
guilt and forgiveness for an instant lie together, side by side, upon 
one altar. 
There at last are sickness and its single remedy joined in 
one healing brightness. 
God has come to claim His Own. 

Forgiveness is complete. 
U(9) 

U 5 A 7. 
And now God's KNOWLEDGE, changeless, certain, pure 
and wholly understandable, enters its Kingdom. 
Gone is 
perception, false and true alike. 
Gone is forgiveness, for its task is 
done. 
And gone are bodies in the blazing light upon the altar to the 
Son of God. 
God knows it is His Own, as it is his. 
And here They 
join, for here the face of Christ has shone away time's final instant, 
and now is the last perception of the world without a purpose and 
without a cause. 
For where God's memory has come at last there is 
no journey, no belief in sin, no walls, no bodies, and the grim appeal 
of guilt and death is there snuffed out forever. 


U 5 A 8. 
Oh my brothers, if you only knew the peace that will 
envelop you and hold you safe and pure and lovely in the Mind of 
God, you could but rush to meet Him where His altar is. 
Hallowed 
your Name and His, 11 for they are joined here in this holy place. 

Here He leans down to lift you back to Him, out of illusions into 
holiness; out of the world and into timelessness 12 ; out of all fear and 
given back to Love. 


6. 
Jesus-Christ 

U 6 A 1. 
There is no need for help to enter Heaven for you never 
left. 
But there is need for help beyond yourself as you are 
circumscribed by false beliefs about your Identity, Which God alone 
established in reality. 
Helpers are given you in many forms, 
although upon the altar They are one. 
Beyond each one there is a 
Thought of God, and this will never change. 
But they have names 
which differ for a time, for time needs symbols, being itself unreal. 



11 Matthew 6:9 “In this manner, therefore, pray: Our Father in heaven. 
Hallowed be Your name.” 

12 In the manuscript “into timelessness” is crossed out and “to eternity" is typed in above it. 
The Notes 
has “timelessness.” 


1747 


IV-9 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


Their names are legion, 13 but we will not go beyond the names the 
course itself employs. 
God does not help because He knows no 
need. 
But He creates all Helpers of His Son while he believes his 
fantasies are true. 
Thank God for them for they will lead you home. 


U(10) 

U 6 A 2. 
The Name of Jesus is the Name of one who was a man but 
saw the face of Christ in all his brothers and remembered God. 
So 
he became identified with Christ, a man no longer, but at one with 
God. 
The man was an illusion, for he seemed to be a separate being, 
walking by himself, within a body that appeared to hold his self 
from Self, as all illusions do. 
Yet who can save unless he sees 
illusions and then identifies them as what they are? Jesus remains a 
Savior because he saw the false without accepting it as true. 
And 
Christ needed his form that He might appear to men and save them 
from their own illusions. 


U 6 A 3. 
In his complete identification with the Christ—the perfect 
Son of God, His one creation and His happiness, forever like 
Himself and One with Him - Jesus became what all of us must be. 

He led the way for us to follow him. 
He leads us back to God 
because he saw the road before him, and he followed it. 
He made a 
clean distinction, still obscure to us, between the false and true. 
He 
offered us all a final demonstration that 14 it is impossible to kill 
God's Son; nor can his life in any way be changed by sin and evil, 
malice, fear or death. 


U 6 A 4. 
And therefore all your sins have been forgiven 15 because 
they carried no effects at all. 
And so they were but dreams. 
Arise 
with him who showed you this because you owe him this who 
shared your dreams that they might be dispelled. 
And shares them 
still, to be at one with you. 



13 Mark 5:9 “Then He asked him, ‘What is your name?" And he answered, saying, ‘My name is 
Legion; for we are many.’” 

14 The word “that” is handwritten at the end of the line. 
The Notes just has the glyph for “it is.” 

15 The word “you” is originally typed here and then crossed out. 
In the Notes the glyph for “you” 
appears above the line, as if it were an afterthought. 



IV-10 


1748 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


U 6 A 5. 
Is he the Christ? Oh yes, along with you. 
His little life on 
earth was not enough to teach the mighty lesson that he learned for 
all of us. 
He will remain with you to lead you from the hell you 
made to God. 
And when you join your will with his, your sight will 
be his vision, for the eyes of Christ are shared. 
Walking with him is 
just as natural as walking with a brother whom you knew since you 
were born, for such indeed he is. 
Some bitter idols have been made 
of him who would be only brother to the world. 
Forgive him your 
illusions, and behold how dear a brother he would be to you. 
For he 
will set your mind at rest at last and carry it with you unto your 
God. 
U(ll) 

U 6 A 6. 
Is he God's only Helper? No, indeed. 
For Christ takes 
many forms with different names until their oneness can be 
recognized. 
But Jesus is for you the bearer of Christ's single 
message of the Love of God. 
You need no other. 
It is possible to 
read his words and benefit from them without accepting him into 
your life. 
Yet he would help you yet a little more if you will share 
your pains and joys with him, and leave them both to find the peace 
of God. 
Yet still it is his lesson most of all that he would have you 
learn, and it is this: 

"There is no death 16 because the Son of God is like his Father. 
Nothing 
you can do can change Eternal Love. 
Forget your dreams of sin and 
guilt, and come with me instead to share the resurrection of God’s Son. 

And bring with you all those whom He has sent to you to care for as I 
care for you. 
” 

7. 
The Holy Spirit 

U 7 A 1. 
Jesus is the manifestation of the Holy Spirit, Whom he 
called down upon the earth after he ascended into Heaven, 17 or 
became completely identified with the Christ, the Son of God as He 


16 2 Timothy 1:10 ‘ ‘But has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has 
abolished death and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel,” 

17 Acts 1:8-9 “But you shall receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you; and you shall be 
witnesses to Me in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the end of the earth. 
Now when He 
had spoken these things, while they watched, He was taken up, and a cloud received Him out of their 
sight.” 


1749 


IV-11 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


created Him. 
The Holy Spirit, being a creation of the one Creator, 
creating with Him and in His likeness or Spirit, is eternal and has 
never changed. 
18 He was "called down upon the earth" 19 in the 
sense that it was now possible to accept Him and to hear His Voice. 

His is the Voice for God, and has therefore taken form. 
This form is 
not His reality, which God alone knows along with Christ, His real 
Son, Who is part of Him. 


U 7 A 2. 
The Holy Spirit is described throughout the course as 
giving us the answer to the separation and bringing the plan of the 
Atonement to us, establishing our particular part in it and showing 
us exactly what it is. 
He has established Jesus as the leader in 
carrying out this plan since he was the first to complete his own part 
perfectly. 
All power in Heaven and earth is therefore given him and 
he will share it with you when you have completed yours. 
20 The 
Atonement principle was given to the Holy Spirit long before Jesus 
set it in motion. 


U 7 A 3. 
The Holy Spirit is described as the remaining 
communication link between God and His separated sons. 
In order 
to fulfill this special function the Holy Spirit has assumed a dual 
function. 
He knows because He is part of God; He perceives 
because He U(12) was sent to save humanity. 
He is the great 
correction principle; the bringer of true perception, the inherent 
power of the vision of Christ. 
He is the light in which the forgiven 
world is perceived; in which the face of Christ alone is seen. 
He 
never forgets the Creator or His Creation. 
He never forgets the Son 
of God. 
He never forgets you. 
And He brings the Love of your 
Father to you in an eternal shining that will never be obliterated 
because God has put it there. 



Is Isaiah 40:28 Have you not known? Have you not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the 
Creator of the ends of the earth, does not grow weak nor weary? There is no searching of His 
understanding. 


19 Acts 1:8-9 (quoted above) 

20 Matthew 28:18 “And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, ‘All authority has been given to Me in 
heaven and on earth.’” 


IV-12 


1750 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


U 7 A 4. 
The Holy Spirit abides in the part of your mind that is part 
of the Christ Mind. 
He represents your Self and your Creator, Who 
are One. 
He speaks for God and also for you, being joined with 
both. 
And therefore it is He Who proves them One. 
He seems to be 
a Voice, for in that form He speaks God's Word to you. 
He seems to 
be a Guide through a far country, for you need that form of help. 
21 
He seems to be whatever meets the needs you think you have. 
But 
He is not deceived when you perceive your self entrapped in needs 
you do not have. 
It is from these He would deliver you. 
It is from 
these that He would make you safe. 


U 7 A 5. 
You are His manifestation in this world. 
Your brother calls 
to you to be His Voice along with him. 
Alone he cannot be the 
Helper of God's Son for he alone is functionless. 
But joined with 
you he is the shining Savior of the world. 
Whose part in its 
redemption you have made complete. 
He offers thanks to you as 
well as him for you arose with him when he began to save the 
world. 
And you will be with him when time is over, and no trace 
remains of dreams of spite in which you dance to death's thin 
melody. 
For in its place the hymn to God is heard a little while. 


And then the Voice is gone, no longer to take form but to return to 
the eternal Formlessness of God. 
U(13) 

8. 
Epilogue 

U 8 A 1. 
Forget not once this journey is begun the end is certain. 

Doubt along the way will come and go and go to come again. 
Yet is 
the ending sure. 
No-one can fail to do what God appointed him to 
do. 
When you forget, remember that you walk with Him and with 
His Word upon your heart. 
Who could despair when hope like this 
is his? Illusions of despair may seem to come, but learn how not to 
be deceived by them. 
Behind each one there is reality and there is 
God. 
Why would you wait for this and trade it for illusions, when 
His Love is but an instant farther on the road where all illusions 


11 Luke 15:13 And not many days after, the younger son gathered all together, journeyed to a far 
country, and there wasted his possessions with prodigal living. 



1751 


IV-13 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


end? The end IS sure and guaranteed by God. 
Who stands before a 
lifeless image when a step away the Holy of the Holies opens up an 
ancient door that leads beyond the world? 22 

U 8 A 2. 
You ARE a stranger here, but you belong to Him Who 
loves you as He loves Himself. 
23 Ask but my help to roll the stone 
away, 24 and it is done according to His Will. 


U 8 A 3. 
We HAVE begun the journey. 
Long ago the end was 
written in the stars and set into the Heavens with a shining Ray that 
held it safe within eternity and through all time as well. 
And holds 
it still; unchanged, unchanging and unchangeable. 


U 8 A 4. 
Be not afraid. 
25 We only start again an ancient journey 
long ago begun that but seems new. 
We have begun again upon a 
road we travelled on before and lost our way a little while. 
And 
now we try again. 
Our new beginning has the certainty the journey 
lacked 'til now. 
Look up and see His Word among the stars, where 
He has set your Name along with His. 
Look up and find your 
certain destiny the world would hide but God would have you see. 

U 8 A 5. 
Let us wait here in silence, and kneel down an instant in 
our gratitude to Him Who called to us and helped us hear His Call. 

And then let us arise and go in faith along the way to Him. 
Now we 
are sure we do not walk alone. 
For God is here, and with Him all 
our brothers. 
Now we know that we will never lose the way again. 

The song begins again which had been stopped 26 only an instant, 
though it seems to be unsung forever. 
What is here begun will grow 
in life and strength and hope, until the world is still U(14) an instant 
and forgets all that the dream of sin had made of it. 



2: Exodus 26:33 “And you shall hang the veil from the clasps. 
Then you shall bring the ark of the 
Testimony in there, behind the veil. 
The veil shall be a divider for you between the holy place and the 
Most Holy.” 

23 Matthew 22:39 And the second is like it: "You shall love your neighbor as yourself." 

24 Matthew 28:2 “And behold, there was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord descended from 
heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat on it.” 

25 John 6:20 “But He said to them, “It is I; do not be afraid.’” (and many others) 

26 Urtext Manuscript has (stilled) typed in brackets, then crossed out by hand. 
The Notes appears to 
have “stilled” but it is not entirely clear. 



IV-14 


1752 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


U 8 A 6. 
Let us go out and meet the newborn world, knowing that 
Christ has been reborn in it, and that the holiness of this rebirth will 
last forever. 
We had lost our way, but He has found it for us. 
Let us 
come and bid Him welcome Who returns to us to celebrate salvation 
and the end of all we thought we made. 
The morning 27 star of this 
new day looks on a different world where God is welcomed and His 
Son with Him. 
28 We who complete Him offer thanks to Him, as He 
gives thanks to us. 
The Son is still, and in the peace 29 that God has 
given him enters his home and is at peace at last. 
30 


27 Urtext Manuscript has “(rising)” typed in above “morning” and then crossed out. 
The Notes has 
“morning star.” 

28 Revelation 2:28 And I will give him the morning star. 


29 Urtext Manuscript has “peace that” crossed out and “(quiet)” typed in. 
The Notes has “peace.” 

30 The Urtext Manuscript includes three lines crossed out at the end, “and there is still at last”; 
“enters the stillness of his home at last”; “enters his home in stillness and in peace.” These 
alternatives also appear in the Notes. 



1753 


IV-15 


PROO 


COPY 



Volume IV Use of Terms 


IV-16 


1754 

PROOF COPY 


Urtext Volume V: Psychotherapy: 

Purpose, Process and Practice 


1755 

PROOF COPY 


1756 

PROOF COPY 


Urtext Volume V: Psychotherapy : 

Purpose, Process and Practice 


Table of Contents 

1. 
An Introduction to Psychotherapy.1 

2. 
The Purpose of Psychotherapy.1 

A. 
Introduction.1 

3. 
The Process of Psychotherapy.3 

A. 
Introduction.3 

B. 
The Limits on Psychotherapy.4 

C. 
The Place of Religion in Psychotherapy.6 

D. 
The Role of the Psychotherapist.9 

E. 
The Process of Illness.10 

F. 
The Process of Healing.13 

G. 
The Definition of Healing.16 

H. 
The Ideal Patient-Therapist Relationship.18 

4. 
The Practice Of Psychotherapy.22 

A. 
The Selection of Patients.22 

B. 
Is Psychotherapy a Profession?.23 

C. 
The Question of Payment.27 


1757 V-iii 


















1758 

PROOF COPY 


Urtext Volume V: Psychotherapy: 

Purpose, Process and Practice 


1. 
An Introduction to Psychotherapy 

P l A l. 
Psychotherapy is the only form of therapy there is. 
Since 
only the mind can be sick, only the mind can be healed. 
Only the 
mind is in need of healing. 
This does not appear to be the case, for 
the manifestations of this world seem real indeed. 
Psychotherapy is 
necessary so that an individual 1 can begin to question his reality. 

Sometimes he is able to start to open his mind without formal help, 
but even then it is always some change in his perception of 
interpersonal relationships that enables him to do so. 
Sometimes he 
needs a more structured, extended relationship with an "official" 
therapist. 
Either way, the task is the same; the patient must be 
helped to change his mind about the "reality" of illusions. 


2 . 
The Purpose of Psychotherapy 

A. 
Introduction 

P 2 A l. 
Very simply, the purpose of psychotherapy is to remove the 
blocks to truth. 
Its aim is to aid the patient in abandoning his fixed 
delusional system, and to begin to reconsider the spurious cause 
and effect relationships on which it rests. 
No-one in this world 
escapes fear, but everyone can reconsider its causes and learn to 
evaluate them correctly. 
God has given everyone a Teacher Whose 
wisdom and help far exceed whatever contributions an earthly 


1 The Urtext manuscript has "an individual can begin to question their reality.” FIP keeps that reading. 

Grammar requires that “an individual question his reality’’’ or “ individuals question their reality .” 

When this was written in the mid-1970s the modem habit of using “their” when “his” or “her” would be 
correct in order to achieve “gender-neutral language” had not come into vogue. 
The Notes has the 
abbreviation indiv. 
which could be either plural or singular and it clearly has the glyph for “their” 
rather than “his” four words later. 
Just before indiv. 
the Notes has a letter or glyph, possibly the glyph 
for “an” crossed out with a dash above it, that dash often being the glyph for “the” but also sometimes 
other things. 
That could be intended as “the individual” and might originally have been “an individual.” 
However it could also just be noise with the intended meaning simply being “individuals” and that is 
the only option which keeps the subject plural to fit with the subsequent unambiguous “their.” 


1759 


V-l 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

therapist can provide. 
Yet there are times and situations in which 
the 2 patient-therapist relationship becomes the means through 
which He offers His greater gifts to both. 


P 2 A 2. 
What better 3 purpose could any relationship have than to 
invite the Holy Spirit to enter into it and give it His Own great gift 
of rejoicing? What higher goal could there be for anyone than to 
learn to call upon God and hear His Answer? And what more 
transcendent aim can there be than to recall the Way, the Truth and 
the Life, 4 and to remember God? To help in this is the proper 
purpose of psychotherapy. 
Could anything be holier? For 
psychotherapy, correctly understood, teaches forgiveness and helps 
the patient to recognize and accept it. 
And in his healing is the 
therapist forgiven with him. 
P(2) 

P 2 A 3. 
Everyone who needs help, regardless of the form of his 
distress, is attacking himself, and his peace of mind is suffering in 
consequence. 
These tendencies are often described as "self¬ 
destructive," and the patient often regards them in that way himself. 

What he does not realize and needs to learn is that this "self," which 
can attack and be attacked as well, is a concept he made up. 


Further, he cherishes it, defends it, and is sometimes even willing to 
"sacrifice" his "life" on its behalf. 
For he regards it as himself. 
This 
self he sees as being acted on, reacting to external forces as they 
demand, and helpless in 5 the power of the world. 


P 2 A 4. 
Psychotherapy, then, must restore to his awareness the 
ability to make his own decisions. 
He must become willing to 
reverse his thinking, and to understand that what he thought 
projected its effects on him were made by his projections on the 
world. 
The world he sees does therefore not exist. 
Until this is at 
least in part accepted, the patient cannot see himself as really 


2 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “the” to “an earthly.” That is not present in the Notes. 


3 The Notes has “greater” rather than “better.” 

4 Urtext manuscript has “Light”, handwritten mark-up corrects this Biblical quote to “Life”. 
This is also 
the reading in the Notes. 
John 14:6 Jesus said to him, “I am the way, the truth, and the life. 
No one 
comes to the Father except through Me.” 

5 FIP replaces “in" with “midst.” The Notes reads “in.” 


V-2 


1760 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


capable of making decisions. 
And he will fight against his freedom 
because he thinks that it is slavery. 


P 2 A 5. 
The patient need not think of truth as God in order to make 
progress in salvation. 
But he must begin to separate truth from 
illusion, recognizing that they are not the same, and becoming 
increasingly willing to see illusions as illusions 6 and to accept the 
truth as true. 
His Teacher will take him on from there, as far as he is 
ready to go. 
Psychotherapy can only save him time. 
The Holy 
Spirit uses time as He thinks best, and He is never wrong. 

Psychotherapy under His direction is one of the means He uses to 
save time, and to prepare additional teachers for His work. 
There is 
no end to the help that He begins and He directs. 
By whatever 
routes He chooses, all psychotherapy leads to God in the end. 
But 
that is up to Him. 
We are all His psychotherapists, for He would 
have us all be healed in Him. 
P(3) 

3 . 
The Process of Psychotherapy 

A. 
Introduction 

P 3 A l. 
Psychotherapy is a process that changes the view of the self. 

At best this "new" self is a more beneficent self-concept, but 
psychotherapy can hardly be expected to establish reality. 
That is 
not its function. 
If it can make way for reality, it has achieved its 
ultimate success. 
Its whole function, in the end, is to help the 
patient deal with one fundamental error; the belief that anger brings 
him something he really wants, and that by justifying attack he is 
protecting himself. 
To whatever extent he comes to realize that this 
is mistaken, 7 to that extent is he truly saved. 


P 3 A 2. 
Patients do not enter the therapeutic relationship with this 
goal in mind. 
On the contrary, such concepts mean little to them, or 
they would not need help. 
Their aim is to be able to retain their self- 
concept exactly as it is, but without the suffering that it entails. 


6 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “illusions” with “false.” The Notes has "illusions.” 

7 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “mistaken” to “error.” The Notes omits the word entirely, 
reading “to whatever extent he comes to realize this, to that extent he is truly saved.” 


1761 


V-3 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

Their whole equilibrium rests on the insane belief that this is 
possible. 
And because to the sane mind it is so clearly impossible, 
what they seek is magic. 
In illusions the impossible is easily 
accomplished, but only at the cost of making illusions true. 
The 
patient has already paid this price. 
Now he wants a "better" illusion. 


P 3 A 3. 
At the beginning, then, the patient's goal and the therapist's 
are at variance. 
The therapist as well as the patient may cherish 
false self-concepts, but their respective perceptions of 
"improvement" still must differ. 
The patient hopes to learn how to 
get the changes he wants without changing his self-concept to any 
significant extent. 
He hopes, in fact, to stabilize it sufficiently to 
include within it the magical powers he seeks in psychotherapy. 
He 
wants to make the vulnerable invulnerable and the finite limitless. 

The self he sees is his god, and he seeks only to serve it better. 


P 3 A 4. 
Regardless of how advanced 8 the therapist himself may be, 
he must want to change the patient's self-concept in some way that 
he believes is real. 
The task of therapy is one of reconciling these 
differences. 
Hopefully, both will learn to give up their original 
goals, for it is only in relationships that salvation can be found. 
At 
the beginning, it is inevitable that patients and therapists alike 
accept unrealistic goals not completely free of magical overtones. 


P(4) They are finally given up in the minds of both. 


B. 
The Limits on Psychotherapy 

P 3 B l. 
Yet the ideal outcome is rarely achieved. 
But psychotherapy 9 
begins with the realization that healing is of the mind, and in 
psychotherapy those have come together who 10 believe this. 
It may 
be they will not get much further, for no-one learns beyond his own 
readiness. 
Yet levels of readiness change, and when therapist or 
patient has reached the next one, there will be a relationship held 
out to them that meets the changing need. 
Perhaps they will come 


8 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “advanced” to “sincere.” The Notes has “advanced.” 

9 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “But psychotherapy” with “Therapy.” The Notes has “But 
therapy.” 

10 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “already.” The Notes doesn’t. 



V-4 


1762 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


together again and advance in the same relationship, making it 
holier. 
Or perhaps each of them will enter into another 
commitment. 
Be assured of this; each will progress. 
Retrogression 
is temporary. 
The overall direction is one of progress toward the 
truth. 


P 3 B 2. 
Psychotherapy itself cannot be creative. 
This is one of the 
errors which the ego fosters; that it is capable of true change, and 
therefore of true creativity. 
When we speak of "the saving illusion" 
or "the final dream," this is not what we mean, but here is the ego's 
last defense. 
"Resistance" is its way of looking at things; its 
interpretation of "progress" 11 and "growth." 12 These interpretations 
will be wrong of necessity, because they are delusional. 
The 
"changes" 13 the ego seeks to make are not really changes. 
They are 
but deeper shadows, or perhaps different cloud patterns. 
Yet what 
is made of nothingness cannot be called new or different. 
Illusions 
are illusions; truth is truth. 


P 3 B 3. 
Resistance as defined here 14 can be characteristic of a 
therapist as well as of a patient. 
Either way, it sets a limit on 
psychotherapy because it restricts its aims. 
Nor can the Holy Spirit 
fight against the intrusions of the ego on the therapeutic process. 


But He will wait, and His patience is infinite. 
His goal is wholly 
undivided always. 
Whatever resolutions patient and therapist reach 
in connection with their own divergent goals, they cannot become 
completely reconciled as one until they join with His. 
Only then is 
all conflict over, for only then can there be certainty. 
P(5) 

P 3 B 4. 
Ideally, psychotherapy is a series of holy encounters in which 
brothers meet to bless each other and to receive the peace of God. 

And this will one day come to pass for every "patient" on the face of 
this earth, for who except a patient could possibly have come here? 
The therapist is only a somewhat more specialized Teacher of God. 

He learns through teaching, and the more advanced he is the more 


11 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete the quotation marks. 
They are present in the Notes. 


12 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete the quotation marks. 
They are present in the Notes. 


13 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete the quotation marks. 
They are present in the Notes. 


14 Handwritten mark-up adds the word “here” which is not in the Urtext manuscript nor the Notes. 



1763 


V-5 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

he teaches and the more he learns. 
But whatever stage he is in, there 
are patients who need him just that way. 
They cannot take more 
than he can give for now. 
Yet they 15 both will find sanity at last. 


C. 
The Place of Religion in Psychotherapy 16 

P 3 C l. 
To be a Teacher of God, it is not necessary to be religious or 
even to believe in God to any recognizable extent. 
It is necessary, 
however, to teach forgiveness rather than condemnation. 
Even in 
this, complete consistency is not required, for one who has 17 
achieved that point can 18 teach salvation completely, within an 
instant and without a word. 
Yet he who has learned all things does 
not need a teacher, and the healed have no need for a therapist. 

Relationships are still the Temple 19 of the Holy Spirit, 20 and they will 
be made perfect in time and restored to Eternity. 
21 

P 3 C 2. 
Formal religion has no place in psychotherapy, but it also has 
no real place in religion. 
In this world, there is an astonishing 
tendency to join contradictory words into one term without 
perceiving the contradiction at all. 
The attempt to formali z e religion 
is so obviously an ego attempt to reconcile the irreconcilable that it 
hardly requires elaboration here. 
Religion is experience; 
psychotherapy is experience. 
At the highest levels they become one. 

Neither is truth itself, but both can lead to truth. 
What can be 
necessary to find truth, which remains perfectly obvious, but to 
remove the seeming obstacles to true awareness? P(6) 


15 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “they.” The word is present in the Notes. 


16 This heading is originally typed at the end of the paragraph; mark-up suggests moving it, as we have 
done. 
However, in the Notes it also occurs at the end of paragraph P 3 C 1, which would make that 
paragraph P 3 B 5. 
It appears from the context that moving the section break is warranted, as this 
paragraph introduces the topic of the following section. 


17 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “has” with “had,” making the sentence shift from present to 
past tense half way through, a most curious alteration. 
In the Notes it is “has.” 

18 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “can” with “could.” In the Notes it is “can.” 

19 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change this to lower case, but in the Notes it is upper case “Temple.” 
20 1 Corinthians 6:19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in 
you, whom you have from God, and you are not your own? 1 Corinthians 3:16 Do you not know that 
you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? 

21 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “Eternity” to lower case, but in the Notes it is upper case. 



V-6 


1764 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


P 3 C 3. 
No-one who learns to forgive can fail to remember God. 

Forgiveness, then, is all that need be taught, because it is all that 
need be learned. 
All blocks to the remembrance of God are forms of 
unforgiveness, and nothing else. 
This is never apparent to the 
patient, and only rarely so to the therapist. 
The world has 
marshalled 22 all its forces against this one awareness, for in it lies the 
ending of the world and all it stands for. 


P 3 C 4. 
Yet it is not the awareness of God that constitutes a 
reasonable goal for psychotherapy. 
This will come when 
psychotherapy is complete, for where there is forgiveness truth 
must come. 
It would be unfair indeed if belief in God were 
necessary to psychotherapeutic success. 
Nor is belief in God a really 
meaningful concept, for God can be but known. 
Belief implies that 
unbelief is possible, but knowledge of God has no true opposite. 


Not to know God is to have no knowledge, and it is to this that all 
unforgiveness leads. 
And without knowledge one can have only 
belief. 


P 3 C 5. 
Different teaching aids appeal to different people. 
Some 
forms of religion have nothing to do with God, and some forms of 
psychotherapy have nothing to do with healing. 
Yet if pupil and 
teacher join in sharing one goal, God will enter into their 
relationship because He has been invited to come in. 
In the same 
way, a union of purpose between patient and therapist restores the 
place of God to ascendance, first through Christ's vision and then 
through the memory of God Himself. 
The process of psychotherapy 
is the return to sanity. 
Teacher and pupil, therapist and patient, are 
all insane or they would not be here. 
Together they can find a 
pathway out, for no-one will find sanity alone. 
P(7) 

P 3 C 6. 
If healing is an invitation to God to enter into His Kingdom, 
what difference does it make how the invitation is written? Does 
the paper matter, or the ink, or the pen? Or is it he who writes that 
gives the invitation? God comes to those who would restore His 


22 Urtext manuscript spells it “martialed”, FIP spells it “marshaled.” Some dictionaries prefer 
“marshalled” which is the spelling in the Notes. 



1765 


V-7 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

world, for they have found the way to call to Him. 
If any two are 
joined. 
He must be there. 
23 It does not matter what their purpose is, 
but they must share it wholly to succeed. 
It is impossible to share a 
goal not blessed by Christ, for what is unseen through His eyes is 
too fragmented to be meaningful. 


P 3 C 7. 
As true religion heals, so must true psychotherapy be 
religious. 
But both have many forms, because no true 24 teacher uses 
one approach to every pupil. 
On the contrary, he listens patiently to 
each one, and lets him formulate his own curriculum; not the 
curriculum's goal, but how he can best reach the aim it sets for him. 

Perhaps the teacher does not think of God as part of teaching. 

Perhaps the psychotherapist does not understand that healing 
comes from God. 
They can succeed where many who believe they 
have found God will fail. 


P 3 C 8. 
What must the teacher do to ensure learning? What must the 
therapist do to bring healing about? Only one thing; the same 
requirement salvation asks of everyone. 
Each one must share one 
goal with someone else, and in so doing, lose all sense of separate 
interests. 
Only by doing this is it possible to transcend the narrow 
boundaries the ego would impose upon the self. 
Only by doing this 
can teacher and pupil, therapist and patient, you and I, accept 
Atonement and learn to give it as it was received. 


P 3 C 9. 
Communion is impossible alone. 
No-one who stands apart 
can receive Christ's vision. 
It is held out to him, but he cannot hold 
out his hand to receive it. 
Let him be still and recognize his 
brother's need is his own. 
25 And let him then meet his brother's 
need as his and see that they are met as one, for such they are. 
What 
is religion but an aid in helping him to see that this is so? And what 
is psychotherapy except a help in just this same direction? It is the 


23 Matthew 18:20 “For where two or three are gathered together in My name, I am there in the midst of 
them.” 

24 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “true” with “good.” The Notes has “true.” 

2:1 Psalm 46:10 “Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth!” 


V-8 


1766 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


goal that makes these processes the same, for they are one in 
purpose and must thus be one in means. 
P(8) 

D, The Role of the Psychotherapist 

P 3 D l. 
The psychotherapist is a leader in the sense that he walks 
slightly ahead of the patient, and helps him to avoid a few of the 
pitfalls along the road by seeing them first. 
Ideally, he is also a 
follower, for One should walk ahead of him to give him light to see. 

Without this One, both will merely stumble blindly on to nowhere. 


It is, however, impossible that this One be wholly absent if the goal 
is healing. 
He may, however, not be recognized. 
And so the little 
light that can be then accepted is all there is to light the way to truth. 


P 3 D 2. 
Healing is limited by the limitations of the psychotherapist, 
as it is limited by those of the patient. 
The aim of the process, 
therefore, is to transcend these limits. 
Neither can do this alone, but 
when they join, the potentiality for transcending all limitations has 
been given them. 
Now the extent of their success depends on how 
much of this potentiality they are willing to use. 
The willingness 
may come from either one at the beginning, and as the other shares 
it, it will grow. 
Progress becomes a matter of decision; it can reach 
almost to Heaven or go no further than a step or two from hell. 


P 3 D 3. 
It is quite possible for psychotherapy 26 to seem to fail. 
It is 
even possible for the result to look like retrogression. 
But in the end 
there must be some success. 
One asks for help; another hears and 
tries to answer in the form of help. 
This is the formula for salvation, 
and must heal. 
Divided goals alone can interfere with perfect 
healing. 
One wholly egoless therapist could heal the world without 
a word, merely by being there. 
No-one need see him or talk to him 
or even know of his existence. 
His simple Presence is enough to 
heal. 



2( ' Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace the originally typed “the psychotherapist” with 
“psychotherapy.” While the Notes reading is slightly ambiguous, “psychotherapy” appears as the most 
probable reading. 



1767 


V-9 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

P 3 D 4. 
The ideal therapist is one with Christ. 
But healing is a 
process, not a fact. 
The therapist cannot progress without the 
patient, and the patient cannot be ready to receive the Christ or he 
could not be sick. 
In a sense, the egoless psychotherapist is an 
abstraction that stands at the end of the process of healing, too 
advanced to believe in sickness and too near to God to keep his feet 
on earth. 
Now he can help through those in need of help, for thus 
he carries out the plan established for salvation. 
P(9) The 
psychotherapist becomes his patient, working through other 
patients to express his thoughts as he receives them from the Mind 
of Christ. 


E. 
The Process of Illness 

P 3 E l. 
As all therapy is psychotherapy, so all illness is mental 
illness. 
It is a judgment on the Son of God, and judgment is a 
mental activity. 
Judgment is a decision, made again and again, 
against creation and its Creator. 
It is a decision to perceive the 
universe as you would have created it. 
It is a decision that truth can 
lie and must be lies. 
What, then, can illness be except an expression 
of sorrow and of guilt? And who could weep but for his innocence? 

P 3 E 2. 
Once God's Son is seen as guilty, illness becomes inevitable. 


It has been asked for and will be received. 
27 And all who ask for 
illness have now condemned themselves to seek for remedies that 
cannot help, because their faith is in the illness and not in salvation. 

There can be nothing that a change of mind cannot effect, for all 
external things are only shadows of a decision already made. 

Change the decision, and how can its shadow be unchanged? 

Illness can be but guilt's shadow, grotesque and ugly since it mimics 
deformity. 
If a deformity is seen as real, what could its shadow be 
except deformed? 28 


27 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 

28 The Urtext manuscript originally has “the form” here. 
Handwritten mark-up and FIP change this to 
“deformed” which restores the reading to that found in the Notes. 



v-io 


1768 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


P 3 E 3. 
The descent into hell follows step by step in an inevitable 
course, once the decision that guilt is real has been made. 
Sickness 
and death and misery now stalk the earth in unrelenting waves, 
sometimes together and sometimes in grim succession. 
Yet all these 
things, however real they seem, are but illusions. 
Who could have 
faith in them once this is realized? And who could not have faith in 
them until he realizes this? Healing is therapy or correction, and we 
have said already and will say again, all therapy is psychotherapy. 

To heal the sick is but to bring this realization to them. 


P 3 E 4. 
The word "cure" has come into disrepute among the more 
"respectable" therapists of the world, and justly so. 
For not one of 
them can cure, and not one of them understands healing. 
At 
worst, 29 they but make the body real in their own minds, and having 
done so, seek for magic by which to heal the ills with which their 
minds endow it. 
P(10) How could such a process cure? It is 
ridiculous from start to finish. 
Yet having started, it must finish 
thus. 
It is as if God were the devil and must be found in evil. 
How 
could love be there? And how could sickness cure? Are not these 
both one question? 

P 3 E 5. 
At best, and the word is perhaps questionable here, the 
"healers" of the world may recognize the mind as the source of 
illness. 
But their error lies in the belief that it can cure itself. 
This 
has some merit in a world where "degrees of error" is a meaningful 
concept. 
Yet must their cures remain temporary, or another illness 
rise 30 instead, for death has not been overcome until the meaning of 
love is understood. 
And who can understand this without the Word 
of God, given by Him to the Holy Spirit as His gift to you? 

P 3 E 6. 
Illness of any kind may be defined as the result of a view of 
the self as weak, vulnerable, evil and endangered, and thus in need 
of constant defense. 
Yet if such were really the self, defense would 
be impossible. 
Therefore, the defenses sought for must be magical. 



29 Urtext manuscript has “worse.” FIP corrects it to “worst” as we do which restores the reading to that 
found in the Notes. 


30 Urtext manuscript has “lies,” handwritten mark-up and FIP correct this to “rise” which is also the 
reading in the Notes. 



1769 


V-ll 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

They must overcome all limits perceived in the self, at the same time 
making a new self-concept into which they 31 cannot return. 
In a 
word, error is accepted as real and dealt with by illusions. 
Truth 
being brought to illusions, reality now becomes a threat and is 
perceived as evil. 
Love becomes feared because reality is love. 
Thus 
is the circle closed against the "inroads" of salvation. 


P 3 E 7. 
Illness is therefore a mistake and needs correction. 
And as 
we have already emphasized before, 32 correction cannot be achieved 
by first establishing the "rightness" of the mistake and then 
overlooking it. 
If illness is real it cannot be overlooked in truth, for 33 
to overlook reality is insanity. 
Yet that is magic's purpose; to make 
illusions true through false perception. 
This cannot heal, for it 
opposes truth. 
Perhaps an illusion of health is substituted for a little 
while, but not for long. 
Fear cannot long be hidden by illusions, for 
it is part of them. 
It will escape and take another form, being the 
source of all illusions. 
P(ll) 

P 3 E 8. 
Sickness is insanity because all sickness is mental illness, and 
in it there are no degrees. 
One of the illusions by which sickness is 
perceived as real is the belief that illness varies in intensity; that the 
degree of threat differs according to the form it takes. 
Herein lies 
the basis of all errors, 34 for all of them are but attempts to 
compromise by seeing just a little bit of hell. 
This is a mockery so 
alien to God that it must be forever inconceivable. 
But the insane 
believe it because they are insane. 


P 3 E 9. 
A madman will defend his own illusions because in them he 
sees his own salvation. 
Thus, he will attack the one who tries to 
save him from them, believing that he is attacking him. 
This curious 
circle of attack-defense is one of the most difficult problems with 
which the psychotherapist must deal. 
In fact, this is his central task; 


31 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “they” with “the old one.” The Notes also has “they.” 

32 FIP and handwritten mark-up delete “before.” The word “before” is in the Notes. 


33 In the Urtext manuscript “for to overlook” is “but to overlook.” Handwritten mark-up and FIP 
replace “but” with “for” which restores the reading in the Notes. 


’ 4 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change the singular “error” to the plural “errors. 
The Notes has the 
same reading as the Urtext. 
“error.” 


V-12 


1770 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


the core of psychotherapy. 
The therapist is seen as one who is 
attacking the patient's most cherished possession; his picture of 
himself. 
And since this picture has become the patient's security as 
he perceives it, the therapist cannot but be seen as a real source of 
danger, to be attacked and even killed. 


P 3 E10. 
The psychotherapist, then, has a tremendous responsibility. 

He must meet attack without attack, and therefore without defense. 

It is his task to demonstrate that defenses are not necessary, and that 
defenselessness is strength. 
This must be his teaching, if his lesson 
is to be that sanity is safe. 
It cannot be too strongly emphasized that 
the insane believe that sanity is threat. 
This is the corollary of the 
"original sin"; the belief that guilt is real and fully justified. 
It is 
therefore the psychotherapist's function to teach that guilt, being 
unreal, cannot be justified. 
But neither is it safe. 
And thus it must 
remain unwanted as well as unreal. 


P 3 E ll. 
Salvation's single doctrine is the goal of all therapy. 
Relieve 
the mind of the insane burden of guilt it carries so wearily, and 
healing is accomplished. 
The body is not cured. 
It is merely 
recognized as what it is. 
Seen rightly, its purpose can be 
understood. 
What is the need for sickness then? Given this single 
shift, all else will follow. 
There is no need for complicated change. 

There is no need for long analyses and wearying discussions and 
pursuits. 
The truth is simple, being one for all. 
P(12) 

F. 
The Process of Healing 

P 3 F 1. 
While truth is simple, it must still be taught to those who 
have already lost their way in endless mazes of complexity. 
This is 
the great illusion. 
In its wake comes the inevitable belief that, to be 
safe, one must control the unknown. 
This strange belief relies on 
certain steps which never reach to consciousness. 
First, it is ushered 
in by the belief that there are forces to be overcome to be alive at all. 

And next, it seems as if these forces can be held at bay only by an 
inflated sense of self that holds in darkness what is truly felt, and 
seeks to raise illusions to the light. 



1771 


V-13 


Volume V Psychotherapy 

P 3 F 2. 
Let us remember that the ones who come to us for help are 
bitterly afraid. 
What they believe will help can only harm; what 
they believe will harm alone can help. 
Progress becomes impossible 
until the patient is persuaded to reverse his twisted way of looking 
at the world; his twisted way of looking at himself. 
The truth is 
simple. 
Yet it must be taught to those who think it will endanger 
them. 
It must be taught to those who will attack because they feel 
endangered, and to those who need the lesson of defenselessness 
above all else, to show them what is strength. 


P 3 F 3. 
If this world were ideal, there could perhaps be ideal therapy. 

And yet it would be useless in an ideal state. 
We speak of ideal 
teaching in a world in which the perfect teacher could not long 
remain; the perfect psychotherapist is but a glimmer of a thought 
not yet conceived. 
But still we speak of what can yet be done in 
helping the insane within the bounds of the attainable. 
While they 
are sick, they can and must be helped. 
No more than that is asked 
of psychotherapy; no less than all he has to give is worthy of the 
therapist. 
For God Himself holds out his brother as his Savior 35 
from the world. 


P 3 F 4. 
Healing is holy. 
Nothing in the world is holier than helping 
one who asks for help. 
And two come very close to God in this 
attempt, however limited, however lacking in sincerity. 
Where two 
have joined for healing, God is there. 
And He has guaranteed that 
He will hear and answer them in truth. 
They can be sure that 
healing is a process He directs, because it is according to His Will. 

We have His Word to guide us, as we try to help our brothers. 
Let 
us not forget that we are helpless of ourselves, and lean upon a 
strength beyond our little scope for what to teach as well as what to 
learn. 
36 P(13) 


35 FIP removes the capital on “Savior” which is present in the Urtext and the Notes. 


36 John 5:19 Then Jesus answered and said to them, "Most assuredly, I say to you, the Son can do 
nothing of Himself, but what He sees the Father do; for whatever He does, the Son also does in like 
manner.” 

John 5:30 “I can of Myself do nothing. 
As I hear, I judge; and My judgment is righteous, because I do 
not seek My own will but the will of the Father who sent Me.” 


V-14 


1772 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


P 3 F 5. 
A brother seeking aid can bring us gifts beyond the heights 
perceived in any dream. 
He offers us salvation, for he comes to us 
as Christ and Savior. 
What he asks is asked by God through him. 

And what we do for him becomes the gift we give to 37 God. 
The 
sacred calling of God's holy Son for help in his perceived distress 
can be but answered by his Father. 
Yet He needs a voice through 
which to speak His holy Word; a hand to reach His Son and touch 
his heart. 
In such a process, who could not be healed? This holy 
interaction is the plan of God Himself, by which His Son is saved. 


P 3 F 6. 
For two have joined. 
And now God's promises are kept by 
Him. 
The limits laid on both the patient and the therapist will count 
as nothing, for the healing has begun. 
What man 38 must start his 39 
Father will complete. 
For He has never asked for more than just the 
smallest willingness, the least advance, the tiniest of whispers of His 
Name. 
To ask for help, whatever form it takes, is but to call on Him. 

And He will send His Answer through the therapist who best can 
serve His Son in all his present needs. 
Perhaps the answer does not 
seem to be a gift from Heaven. 
It may even seem to be a worsening 
and not a help. 
Yet let the outcome not be judged by us. 


P 3 F 7. 
Somewhere all gifts of God must be received. 
In time no 
effort can be made in vain. 
It is not our perfection that is asked in 
our attempts to heal. 
We are deceived already, if we think there is a 
need of healing. 
And the truth will come to us only through one 
who seems to share our dream of sickness. 
Let us help him to 
forgive himself for all the trespasses with which he would condemn 
himself without a cause. 
40 His healing is our own. 
And as we see 
the sinlessness 41 in him come shining through the veil of guilt that 


’ 7 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “to” which was not originally typed, restoring the Notes reading. 


38 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “man” with “they.” The Notes has “man.” 

39 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “his” with “their.” The Notes has “his.” 

40 Matthew 6:12-15 “And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us. 
And 
bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one. 
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, 
your heavenly Father will also forgive you. 
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your 
Father forgive your trespasses.” 

41 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace the originally typed “sinless” with “sinlessness.” This is also 
the reading in the Notes. 



1773 


V-15 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

shrouds the Son of God, we will behold in him the Face 42 of Christ, 
and understand that it is but our own. 


P 3 F 8. 
Let us stand silently before God's Will, and do what It 43 has 
chosen that we do. 
There is one way alone by which we come to 
where all dreams began. 
And it is there that we will lay them down, 
to come away in peace forever. 
Hear a brother call for help and 
answer him. 
It will be God to Whom you answer, for you called on 
Him. 
There is no other way to hear His Voice. 
There is no other 
way to seek 44 His Son. 
There is no other way to find 45 your Self. 


Holy is healing, for the Son of God returns to Heaven through its 
kind embrace. 
For healing tells him, in the Voice of 46 God, that all 47 
his sins have been forgiven him. 
48 P(14) 

G. 
The Definition of Healing 

P 3 G l. 
The process of psychotherapy, then, can be defined simply as 
forgiveness, for no healing can be anything else. 
The unforgiving 
are sick, believing they are unforgiven. 
The hanging-on to guilt, its 
hugging-close and sheltering, its loving protection and alert defense, 
-- all this is but the grim refusal to forgive. 
"God may not enter 
here” the sick repeat, over and over, while they mourn their loss and 
yet rejoice in it. 
Healing occurs as a patient begins to hear the dirge 
he sings, and questions its validity. 
Until he hears it, he cannot 
understand that it is he who sings it to himself. 
To hear it is the first 
step in recovery. 
To question it must then become his choice. 



42 Handwritten mark-up and FIP make “Face” lower case. 
In the Notes it is capitalized. 


42 Handwritten mark-up and FIP make "It” lower case. 
In the Notes it is capitalized. 


44 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “find” with “seek” In this and the next sentence, “seek” and 
"find” are switched. 
In the Notes it is originally written “find His Son” and “seek your Self’ but these 
are crossed out and switched. 
The exact same handwritten corrections occur in the TJrtext manuscript, 
suggesting they might have been made at the same time. 
We’ve kept it here as originally written in the 
Notes and typed in the Urtext manuscript. 


45 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “seek” with “find.” (see previous footnote) 

4< ’ Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “of’ with “for.” In the Notes it is “of.” 

47 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “all” restoring the passage to the reading found in the Notes. 


4R Our copy of the Urtext manuscript is missing the last word, “him” which is present in the Notes. 
FIP 
includes it. 



V-16 


1774 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


P 3 G 2. 
There is a tendency, and it is very strong, to hear this song of 
death 49 an instant, and then dismiss it uncorrected. 
These fleeting 
awarenesses represent the many opportunities given us literally "to 
change our tune." The sound of healing can be heard instead. 
But 
first the willingness to question the "truth" of the song of 
condemnation must arise. 
The strange distortions woven 
inextricably into the self-concept, itself but a "pseudo-creation," 50 
make this ugly sound seem truly beautiful. 
"The rhythm of the 
universe," "the herald angel's song," all these and more are heard 
instead of loud discordant shrieks. 


P 3 G 3. 
The ear translates; it does not hear. 
The eye reproduces; it 
does not see. 
Their task is to make agreeable whatever is called on, 
however disagreeable it may be. 
They answer the decisions of the 
mind, reproducing its desires and translating them into acceptable 
and pleasant forms. 
Sometimes the thought behind the form breaks 
through, but only very briefly, and the mind grows fearful and 
begins to doubt its sanity. 
Yet it will not permit its slaves to change 
the forms they look upon; the sounds they hear. 
These are its 
"remedies"; its "safeguards" from insanity. 


P 3 G 4. 
These testimonies which the senses bring have but one 
purpose; to justify attack and thus keep unforgiveness unrecognized 
for what it is. 
Seen undisguised it is intolerable. 
Without protection 
it could not endure. 
Here is all sickness cherished, but without the 
recognition that this is so. 
For when an unforgiveness is not 
recognized, the form it takes seems to be something else. 
And now 
it is the "something else" that seems to terrify. 
But it is not the 
"something else" that can be healed. 
It is not sick, and P(15) needs no 
remedy. 
To concentrate your healing efforts here is but futility. 


Who can cure what cannot be sick and make it well? 

P 3 G 5. 
Sickness takes many forms, and so does unforgiveness. 
The 
forms of one but reproduce the forms of the other, for they are the 
same illusion. 
So closely is one translated into the other, that a 


45 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “only” which is not present in the Notes. 


50 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete quotation marks which are present in the Notes. 



1775 


V-17 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

careful study of the form a sickness takes will point quite clearly to 
the form of unforgiveness that it represents. 
Yet seeing this will not 
effect a cure. 
That is achieved by only one recognition; that only 
forgiveness heals an unforgiveness, and only an unforgiveness can 
possibly give rise to sickness of any kind. 


P 3 G 6. 
This realization is the final goal of psychotherapy. 
How is it 
reached? The therapist sees in the patient all that he has not 
forgiven in himself, and is thus given another chance to look at it, 
open it to re-evaluation and forgive it. 
When this occurs, he sees his 
sins as gone into a past that is no longer here. 
Until he does this, he 
must think of evil as besetting him here and now. 
The patient is his 
screen for the projection of his sins, enabling him to let them go. 
Let 
him retain one spot of sin in what he looks upon, and his release is 
partial and will not be sure. 


P 3 G 7. 
No-one is healed alone. 
This is the joyous song salvation 
sings to all who hear its Voice. 
This statement cannot be too often 
remembered by all who see themselves as therapists. 
Their patients 
can but be seen as the bringers of forgiveness, for it is they who 
come to demonstrate their sinlessness to eyes that still believe that 
sin is there to look upon. 
Yet will the proof of sinlessness, seen in 
the patient and accepted in the therapist, offer the mind of both a 
covenant in which they meet and join and are as one. 
P(16) 

H. 
The Ideal Patient-Therapist Relationship 

P 3 H 1 . 
Who, then, is the therapist, and who is the patient? In the 
end, everyone is both. 
He who needs healing must heal. 


"Physician, heal thyself." 51 Who else is there to heal? And who else 
is in need of healing? Each patient who comes to a therapist offers 
him a chance to heal himself. 
He is therefore his therapist. 
And 
every therapist must learn to heal from each patient who comes to 
him. 
He thus becomes his patient. 
God does not know of separation. 



51 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete quotation marks. 
This paragraph has not been located in the 
Notes. 


Luke 4:23 He said to them, “You will surely say this proverb to Me, ‘Physician, heal yourself! 
Whatever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Your country.’” 


V-18 


1776 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


What He knows is only that He has one Son. 
His knowledge is 
reflected in the ideal patient-therapist relationship. 
God comes to 
him who calls, and in Him he 52 recognizes Himself. 


P3H2. 
Think carefully, teacher and therapist, for whom you pray, 
and who is in need of healing. 
For therapy is prayer, and healing is 
its aim and its result. 
What is prayer except the joining of minds in 
a relationship which Christ can enter? This is His home, into which 
psychotherapy invites Him. 
What is symptom cure, when another 
is always there to choose? But once Christ enters in, what choice is 
there except to have Him stay? There is no need for more than this, 
for it is everything. 
Healing is here, and happiness and peace. 


These are the "symptoms" of the ideal patient-therapist relationship, 
replacing those with which the patient came to ask for help. 


P 3 H 3. 
The process that takes place in this relationship is actually 
one in which the therapist in his heart tells the patient that all his 
sins have been forgiven him, along with his own. 
What could be the 
difference between healing and forgiveness? Only Christ forgives, 
knowing His sinlessness. 
His vision heals perception and sickness 
disappears. 
Nor will it return again, once its cause has been 
removed. 
This, however, needs the help of a very advanced 
therapist, capable of joining with the patient in a holy relationship in 
which all sense of separation finally is overcome. 


P 3 H 4. 
For this, one thing and one thing only is required: The 
therapist in no way confuses himself with God. 
All "unhealed 
healers" make this fundamental confusion in one form or another, 
because they must regard themselves as self-created rather than 
God-created. 
This confusion is rarely if ever in awareness, or the 
unhealed P(l7) healer would instantly become a Teacher of God, 
devoting his life to the function of true healing. 
Before he reached 
this point, he thought he was in charge of the therapeutic process 
and was therefore responsible for its outcome. 
His patient's 


5 The capitals on Him and He are reversed in the Urtext manuscript. 
This paragraph has not been 
located in the Notes. 



1777 


V-19 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


failures 53 thus became his own mistakes, 54 and guilt became the 
cover, dark and strong, for what should be the Holiness of Christ. 

Guilt is inevitable in those who use their judgment in making their 
decisions. 
Guilt is impossible in those through whom the Holy 
Spirit speaks. 


P 3 H 5. 
The passing of guilt is the true aim of therapy and the 
obvious aim of forgiveness. 
In this their oneness can be clearly seen. 

Yet who could experience the end of guilt who feels responsible for 
his brother in the role of guide for him? Such a function 
presupposes a knowledge that no-one here can have; a certainty of 
past, present and future, and of all the effects that may occur in 
them. 
Only from this omniscient point of view would such a role be 
possible. 
Yet no perception is omniscient, nor is the tiny self of one 
alone against the universe able to assume he has such wisdom 
except in madness. 
That many therapists are mad is obvious. 
No 
unhealed healer can be wholly sane. 


P 3 H 6. 
Yet it is as insane not to accept a function God has given you 
as to invent one He has not. 
The advanced therapist in no way can 
ever doubt the power that is in him. 
Nor does he doubt its Source. 

He understands all power in earth and Heaven belongs to him 
because of who he is. 
55 And he is this because of his Creator, Whose 
Love is in him and Who cannot fail. 
Think what this means; he has 
the gifts of God Himself to give away. 
His patients are God's saints, 
who call upon his sanctity to make it theirs. 
And as he gives it to 
them, they behold Christ's shining face as it looks back at them. 


P 3 H 7. 
The insane, thinking they are God, are not afraid to offer 
weakness to the Son of God. 
56 But what they see in him because of 


53 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “errors” in place of “failures.” In the Notes there are two words 
crossed out, which aren’t legible, and the word “failures” is written in between the lines to replace 
them. 


34 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “failures” in place of “mistakes.” The Notes has “mistakes.” 

55 Matthew 28:18 And Jesus came and spoke to them, saying, “All authority has been given to Me in 
heaven and on earth.” 

56 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “Son of God” to “God’s Son.” In the Notes it is “Son of God” 
but there is a curious mark between “of’ which occurs at the end of line N 3:36:2 and “God” which 
occurs at the beginning of line N 3:36:3 which may be a question mark indicating scribal uncertainty. 



V-20 


1778 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


this they fear indeed. 
The unhealed healer cannot but be fearful of 
his patients, and suspect them of the treachery he sees in him. 
He 
tries to heal, and thus at times he may. 
But he will not succeed 
except to some extent and for a little while. 
He does not see the 
Christ in him who calls. 
P(18) What answer can he give to one who 
seems to be a stranger; alien to the truth and poor in wisdom, 
without the god who must be given him? Behold your God in him, 
for what you see will be your Answer. 


P 3 H 8. 
Think what the joining of two brothers really means. 
And 
then forget the world and all its little triumphs and its dreams of 
death. 
The same are one, and nothing now can be remembered of 
the world of guilt. 
The room becomes a temple, and the street a 
stream of stardust brushing 57 lightly past all sickly dreams. 
Healing 
is done, for what is perfect needs no healing, and what remains to be 
forgiven where there is no sin? 

P 3 H 9. 
Be thankful, therapist, that you can see such things as this, if 
you but understand your proper role. 
But if you fail in that, 58 you 
have denied that God created you, and so you will not know you 
are His Son. 
59 Who is your brother 60 now? What saint can come to 
take you home with him? You lost the way. 
And can you now 
expect to see in him an answer that you have refused to give? Heal 
and be healed. 
There is no other choice of pathways that can ever 
lead to peace. 
Oh let your patient in, for he has come to you from 
God. 
Is not his holiness enough to wake your memory of Him? P(l9) 


37 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “stardust brushing” with “stars that brush.” The Notes has 
“stardust brushing.” 

58 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “that” to “this” restoring the material to the form found in the 
Notes. 


59 “Son” is not capitalized in the Urtext manuscript. 
It is in the Notes and the capitalization is 
appropriate for a person of the Trinity. 
The omission of capitalization here is deemed a typo. 


60 Originally typed “bother” ... 
this is a typo Thetford reports frequently making in his autobiographical 
speech. 
This appears to be clearly a typo. 
It is “brother” in the Notes and FIP. 



1779 


V-21 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


4 . 
The Practice Of Psychotherapy 

A. 
The Selection of Patients 

P 4 A l. 
Everyone who is sent to you is a patient of yours. 
This does 
not mean that you select him, nor that you choose the kind of 
"treatment" that is suitable. 
But it does mean that no-one comes to 
you by mistake. 
There are no errors in God's plan. 
It would be an 
error, however, to assume that you know what to offer everyone 
who comes. 
This is not up to you to decide. 
There is a tendency to 
assume that you are being called on constantly to make sacrifices of 
yourself for those who come. 
This could hardly be true. 
To demand 
sacrifice of yourself is to demand a sacrifice of God, and He knows 
nothing of sacrifice. 
Who could ask of Perfection that He be 
imperfect? 

P 4 A 2. 
Who, then, decides what each brother needs? Surely not 
you, who do not yet recognize who he is who asks. 
There is 
Something in him that will tell you, if you listen. 
And that is the 
answer; listen. 
Do not demand, do not decide, do not sacrifice. 

Listen. 
What you hear is true. 
Would God send His Son to you and 
not be sure you recognize his needs? Think what God is telling you; 
He needs your voice to speak for Him. 
Could anything be holier? 

Or a greater gift to you? Would you rather choose who would be 
god, or hear the Voice of Him Who is God in you? 

P 4 A 3. 
Your patients need not be physically present for you to serve 
them in the Name of God. 
This may be hard to remember, but God 
will not have His gifts to you limited to the few you actually see. 


You can see others as well, for 61 seeing is not limited to the body's 
eyes. 
Some do not need your physical presence. 
They need you as 
much, and perhaps even more, at the instant they are sent. 
You will 
recognize them in whatever way can be most helpful to both of you. 

It does not matter how they come. 
They will be sent in whatever 
form is most helpful; a name, a thought, a picture, an idea, or 


M The Urtext manuscript has “but” typed. 
Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “but” to “for” which 
restores the Notes reading. 



V -22 


1780 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


perhaps just a feeling of reaching out to someone somewhere. 
The 
joining is in the hands of the Holy Spirit. 
It cannot fail to be 
accomplished. 
P(20) 

P 4 A 4. 
A holy therapist, an advanced Teacher of God, never forgets 
one thing; he did not make the curriculum of salvation, nor did he 
establish his part in it. 
He understands that his part is necessary to 
the whole, and that through it he will recognize the whole when his 
part is complete. 
Meanwhile he must learn, and his patients are the 
means sent to him for his learning. 
What could he be but grateful 
for them and to them? They come bearing God. 
Would he refuse 
this Gift for a pebble, or would he close the door on the savior of the 
world to let in a ghost? Let him not betray the Son of God. 
Who 
calls on him is far beyond his understanding. 
Yet would he not 
rejoice that he can answer, when only thus will he be able to hear 
the call and understand that it is his? P(21) 

B. 
Is Psychotherapy a Profession? 

P 4 B l. 
Strictly speaking the answer is no. 
How could a separate 
profession be one in which everyone is engaged? And how could 
any limits be laid on an 62 interaction in which everyone is both 
patient and therapist in every relationship into 63 which he enters? 
Yet practically speaking, it can still be said that there are those who 
devote themselves primarily to healing of one sort or another as 
their chief function. 
And it is to them that a large number of others 64 
turn for help. 
That, in effect, is the practice of therapy. 
These 65 are 
therefore "officially" helpers. 
They are devoted to certain kinds of 
needs in their professional activities, although they may be far more 
able teachers outside of them. 
These people need no special rules, of 


62 Urtext manuscript has “a kind of' typed above the line, and crossed out by hand. 
It is not present in 
the Notes. 


63 The Urtext manuscript has “in” here but the Notes indicates “into” which is more appropriate. 


64 Urtext manuscript has “people” typed above the line, and crossed out by hand. 
The Notes also has 
two curious cross-outs in this line offering two alternate readings. 
See N 3:41:14-15. 


65 Urtext manuscript has “people” typed above the line, and crossed out by hand. 
The word “people” is 
in the Notes. 



1781 


V-23 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

course, but they may be called upon to use 66 special applications of 
the general principles of healing. 


P 4 B 2. 
First, the professional therapist is in an excellent position to 
demonstrate that there is no order of difficulty in healing. 
For this, 
however, he needs special training, because the curriculum by 
which he became a therapist probably taught him little or nothing 
about the real principles of healing. 
In fact, it probably tried to 
teach 67 him how to make healing impossible. 
Most of the world's 
training follows 68 a curriculum in judgment, with the aim of making 
the therapist a judge. 


P 4 B 3. 
Even this the Holy Spirit can use, and will use, given the 
slightest invitation. 
The unhealed healer may be arrogant, selfish, 
unconcerned, and actually dishonest. 
Fie may be disinterested and 
unconcerned with 69 healing as his major goal. 
Yet something 
happened to him, however slight it may have been, when he chose 
to be a healer, however misguided the direction he may have 
chosen. 
That "something" is enough. 
Sooner or later that something 
will rise in awareness 70 and grow; a patient will touch his heart, and 
the therapist 71 will silently ask him for help. 
Fie has himself found a 
therapist. 
Fie has asked the Holy Spirit to enter the relationship and 
heal it. 
Fie has accepted the Atonement for himself. 
P(22) 

P 4 B 4. 
God is said to have looked on all Fie created and pronounced 
it good. 
72 No, Fie declared it perfect, and so it was. 
And since Elis 


66 Originally typed “give,” Urtext manuscript mark-up suggests “offer” and finally “use” as seen here. 

The Notes has “use.” 

67 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “taught” instead of “tried to teach.” The Notes has “tried to 
teach.” 

68 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “training programs follow” with “training follows” which 
would more closely resemble the Notes which has “training follow” which has an obvious grammar 
problem. 
It would need to be “training follows” which is what the mark-up indicates. 


69 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “may be uninterested in.” The Notes has “may really be set 
unconcerned with healing as his major goal.” The word really is written between the lines and appears 
to be an afterthought. 
The word “act” is crossed out. 


70 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “in awareness.” FIP omits it. 
The Notes reads “sooner or later that 
it will rise and grow; a patient will ...” 

71 Urtext manuscript has “he,” handwritten mark-up and FIP substitute “therapist.” In the Notes it is 
“he.” 

72 Genesis 1:31 Then God saw everything that He had made, and indeed it was very good. 
So the 
evening and the morning were the sixth day. 



V-24 


1782 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


creations do not change and last forever, so it is now. 
Yet neither a 
perfect therapist nor a perfect patient can possibly exist. 
Both must 
have denied their perfection, for their very need for each other 
implies a sense of lack. 
A one-to-one relationship is not one 
Relationship. 
Yet it is the means of return; the way God chose for 
the return of His Son. 
In that strange dream a strange correction 
must enter, for only that is the call to awake. 
And what else should 
therapy be? Awake and be glad, for all your sins have been 
forgiven you. 
This is the only message that any two should ever 
give each other. 


P 4 B 5. 
Something good must come from every meeting of patient 
and therapist. 
And that good is saved for both, against the day 
when they can recognize that only that was real in their relationship. 

At that moment it is 73 returned to them, blessed by the Holy Spirit as 
a gift from their Creator as a sign of His Love. 
For the therapeutic 
relationship must become like the relationship of the Father and the 
Son. 
There is no other, for there is nothing else. 
The therapists of 
this world do not expect this outcome, and many of their patients 
would not 74 be able to accept help from them if they did. 
Yet no 
therapist really sets the goal for the relationships of which he is a 
part. 
His understanding begins with recognizing this, and then goes 
on from there. 


P 4 B 6. 
It is in the instant that the therapist forgets to judge the 
patient that healing occurs. 
In some relationships this point is never 
reached, although both patient and therapist may arrive at 
different 75 dreams in the process. 
Yet it will not be the same dream 
for both of them, and so it is not the dream of forgiveness in which 
both will someday wake. 
The good is saved; indeed is cherished. 



73 Urtext manuscript has “it is” which is the same as the Notes. 
"The good” is handwritten in between 
the lines. 
FIP preserves that editing change. 


74 The word “not” is handwritten, it is not in the original Urtext manuscript. 
It is, however, present in 
the Notes. 


75 The Urtext manuscript has “may arrive at different dreams...” Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace 
that with “may change their dreams.” The Notes has “may arrive at a different dream in the process.” 
Also, the Notes appears to have initially said “the patient may arrive at a different dream in the process” 
with strikeout and interlinear writing changing that to “both patient and therapist may arrive at a 
different dream in the process.” 


1783 


V-25 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

But only little time is saved and 76 the new dreams will lose their 
temporary appeal and turn to dreams of fear, which is the content of 
all dreams. 
Yet no patient can accept more than he is ready to 
receive, and no therapist can offer more than he believes he has. 


And so there is a place for all relationships in this world, and they 
will bring as much good as each can accept and use. 
P(23) 

P 4 B 7. 
Yet it is when judgment ceases that healing occurs, because 
only then it can be understood that there is no order of difficulty in 
healing. 
This is a necessary understanding for the healed healer. 


He has learned that it is no harder to wake a brother from one 
dream than from another. 
No professional therapist can hold this 
understanding consistently in his mind, offering it to all who come 
to him. 
There are some in this world who have come very close, but 
they have not accepted the gift entirely in order to stay and let their 
understanding remain on earth until the closing of time. 
They could 
hardly be called professional therapists. 
They are the Saints of God. 

They are the Saviors of the world. 
Their image remains, because 
they have chosen that it be so. 
They take the place of other images, 
and help with kindly dreams. 


P 4 B 8. 
Once the professional therapist has realized that minds are 
joined, he can also recognize that order of difficulty in healing is 
meaningless. 
Yet well before he reaches this in time he can go 
toward it. 
Many holy instants can be his along the way. 
A goal 
marks the end of a journey, not the beginning, and as each goal is 
reached another can be dimly seen ahead. 
Most professional 
therapists are still at the very start of the beginning stage of the first 
journey. 
Even those who have begun to understand what they must 
do may still oppose the setting-out. 
Yet all the laws of healing can 
be theirs in just an instant. 
The journey is not long except in dreams. 



76 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “and” and begin a new sentence with “The”. 
The Notes has it as 
the Urtext was originally typed. 



V-26 


1784 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


P 4 B 9. 
The professional therapist has one advantage that can save 
enormous time if it is properly used. 
He has chosen a road on 77 
which there is great temptation to misuse his role. 
This enables him 
to pass by many obstacles to peace quite quickly, if he escapes the 
temptation to assume a function that has not been given him. 
To 
understand there is no order of difficulty in healing, he must also 
recognize the equality of himself and the patient. 
There is no 
halfway point in this. 
Either they are equal or not. 
The attempts of 
therapists to compromise in this respect are strange indeed. 
Some 
utilize the relationship merely to collect bodies to worship at their 
shrine, and this they regard as healing. 
P(24) Many patients, too, 
consider this strange procedure as salvation. 
Yet at each meeting 
there is One Who says, "My brother, choose again." 

P 4 B 10. 
Do not forget that any form of specialness must be 
defended, and will be. 
The defenseless therapist has the strength of 
God with him, but the defensive therapist has lost sight of the 
Source of his salvation. 
He does not see and he does not hear. 
How, 
then, can he teach? Because it is the Will of God that he take his 
place in the plan for salvation. 
Because it is the Will of God that his 
patients be helped to join with him there. 
Because his inability to 
see and hear does not limit the Holy Spirit in any way. 
Except in 
time. 
In time there can be a great lag between the offering and the 
acceptance of healing. 
This is the veil across the Face of Christ. 
Yet 
it can be but an illusion, because time does not exist and the Will of 
God has always been exactly as it is. 
P(25) 

C. 
The Question of Payment 

P 4 C l. 
No-one can pay for therapy, for healing is of God and He 
asks for nothing. 
It is, however, part of His plan that everything in 
this world be used by the Holy Spirit to help in carrying out the 
plan. 
Even an advanced therapist has some earthly needs while he 
is here. 
Should he need money it will be given him, not in payment. 



77 Urtext manuscript has “chosen a role on which.” handwritten mark-up changes that to “chosen a road 
on which,” and then changes it again, with FIP to “chosen a road in which.” Temptations aren’t “in” 
roads, but rather are “on” them, so we’re going with the second option. 
The Notes has “road on which.” 


1785 


V-2 7 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

but to help him better serve the plan. 
Money is not evil. 
It is 
nothing. 
But no-one here can live with no illusions, for he must yet 
strive to have the last illusion be accepted by everyone everywhere. 

He has a mighty part in this one purpose, for which he came. 
He 
stays here but for this. 
And while he stays he will be given what he 
needs to stay. 


P 4 C 2. 
Only an unhealed healer could 78 try to heal for money, and 
he will not succeed to the extent to which he values it. 
Nor will he 
find his healing in the process. 
There will be those of whom the 
Holy Spirit asks some payment for His purpose. 
There will be those 
from whom He does not ask. 
It should not be the therapist who 
makes these decisions. 
There is a difference between payment and 
cost. 
To give money where God's plan allots it has no cost. 
To 
withhold it from where it rightfully belongs has enormous cost. 
The 
therapist who would do this loses the name of healer, for he could 
never understand what healing is. 
He cannot give it, and so he does 
not have it. 


P 4 C 3. 
The therapists of this world are indeed useless to the world's 
salvation. 
They make demands, and so they cannot give. 
Patients 
can pay only for the exchange of illusions. 
This, indeed, must 
demand payment, and the cost is great. 
A "bought" relationship 
cannot offer the only gift whereby all healing is accomplished. 

Forgiveness, the Holy Spirit's only dream, must have no cost. 
For if 
it does, it merely crucifies God's Son again. 
Can this be how he is 
forgiven? Can this be how the dream of sin will end? 

P 4 C 4. 
The "right to live" 79 is something no-one need fight for. 
It is 
promised him, and guaranteed by God. 
Therefore it is a right the 
therapist and patient share alike. 
P(26) If their relationship is to be 
holy, whatever one needs is given by the other; whatever one lacks 
the other supplies. 
Herein is the relationship made holy, for herein 
both are healed. 
The therapist repays the patient in gratitude, as 
does the patient repay him. 
There is no cost to either. 
But thanks 


7S Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “would.” The Notes clearly has “could.” 

79 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete quotation marks. 
They are present in the Notes. 



V-28 


1786 



Volume V Psychotherapy 


are due to both, for the release from long imprisonment and doubt. 

Who would not be grateful for such a gift? Yet who could possibly 
imagine that it could be bought? 

P 4 C 5. 
It has well been 80 said that to him who hath shall be given. 
81 
Because he has, he can give. 
And because he gives, he shall be 
given. 
This is the law of God, and not of the world. 
So it is with 
God's healers. 
They give because they have heard His Word and 
understood 

it. 
All that they need will thus be given them. 
But they will lose this 
understanding unless they remember that all they have comes only 
from God. 
If they believe they need anything from a brother, they 
will recognize him as a brother no longer. 
And if they do this, a 
light goes out even in Heaven. 
Where God's Son turns against 
himself, he can look only upon darkness. 
He has himself denied the 
light, and cannot see. 


P 4 C 6. 
One rule should always be observed: No-one should be 
turned away because he cannot pay. 
No-one is sent by accident to 
anyone. 
Relationships are always purposeful. 
Whatever their 
purpose may have been before the Holy Spirit entered them, they 
are always His potential temple 82 ; the resting place of Christ and 
home of God Himself. 
Whoever comes has been sent. 
Perhaps he 
was sent to give his brother the money he needed. 
Both will be 
blessed thereby. 
Perhaps he was sent to teach the therapist how 
much he needs forgiveness, and how valueless is money in 
comparison. 
Again will both be blessed. 
Only in terms of cost 
could one have more. 
In sharing, everyone must gain a blessing 
without cost. 



0 Urtext manuscript has “be said.” Handwritten mark-up corrects this to “been said.” This corrects an 
apparent typo and restores the reading found in the Notes. 


81 Matthew 13:12 “For whoever has, to him more will be given, and he will have abundance; but 
whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.” 

82 1 Corinthians 3:16 Do you not know that you are the temple of God and that the Spirit of God 
dwells in you? 

1 Corinthians 6:19 Or do you not know that your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, 
whom you have from God, and you are not your own? 


1787 


V-29 



Volume V Psychotherapy 

P 4 C 7. 
This view of payment may well seem impractical, and in the 
eyes of the world it would be so. 
Yet not one worldly thought is 
really practical. 
How much is gained by striving for illusions? How 
much is lost by throwing God away? And is it possible to do so? 
Surely it is impractical to strive for nothing, and to attempt to do 
what is impossible. 
Then stop a while, long enough to think of this: 
P(27) You have perhaps been seeking for salvation without 
recognizing where to look. 
Whoever asks your help can show you 
where. 
What greater gift than this could you be given? What 
greater gift is there that you would give? 

P 4 C 8. 
Physician, healer, therapist, teacher, heal thyself. 
83 Many will 
come to you carrying the gift of healing, if you so elect. 
The Holy 
Spirit never refuses an invitation to enter and abide with you. 
He 
will give you endless opportunities to open the door to your 
salvation, for such is His function. 
He will also tell you exactly what 
your function is in every circumstance and at all times. 
Whoever He 
sends you will reach you, holding out his hand to his Friend. 
Let 
the Christ in you bid him welcome, for that same Christ is in him as 
well. 
Deny him entrance, and you have denied the Christ in you. 

Remember the sorrowful story of the world, and the glad tidings 84 
of salvation. 
Remember the plan of God for the restoration of joy 
and peace. 
And do not forget how very simple are the ways of God: 

You were lost in the darkness of the world until you asked for light. 


And then God sent His Son to give it to you . 
85 


83 Luke 4:23 He said to them, “You will surely say this proverb to Me, "Physician, heal yourself! 
Whatever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in Your country.” 

84 Luke 1:19 And the angel answered and said to him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of 
God, and was sent to speak to you and bring you these glad tidings.” 

85 Romans 8:3 For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending 
His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned sin in the flesh, 


V-30 


1788 



Urtext Volume VI: Song of Prayer 


1789 

PROOF COPY 


1790 

PROOF COPY 


Urtext Volume VI: Song of Prayer 


Table of Contents 


1. 
Prayer.1 

A. 
Introduction:.1 

B. 
True Prayer.4 

C. 
The Ladder of Prayer.6 

D. 
Praying for Others.9 

E. 
Praying with Others.11 

F. 
The Ladder Ends.13 

2. 
Forgiveness.14 

A. 
Introduction.14 

B. 
Forgiveness of Yourself.14 

C. 
Forgiveness-to-destroy.18 

D. 
Forgiveness-for-Salvation.20 

3. 
Healing.23 

A. 
Introduction.23 

B. 
The Cause of Sickness.23 

C. 
False versus True Healing.25 

D. 
Separation versus Union.27 

E. 
The Holiness of Healing.29 


1791 

PROOF COPY 


Vl-iii 




















Vl-iv 


1792 

PROOF COPY 


Urtext Volume VI: Song of Prayer 

Prayer 

A. 
Introduction: 

S 1 A 1 Prayer is the greatest gift with which God blessed His Son 
at his creation. 
It was then what it is to become; the single Voice 
Creator and creation share; the song the Son sings to the Father, 

Who returns the thanks it offers Him unto the Son. 
Endless the 
harmony, and endless too the joyous concord of the Love They 1 give 
forever to each other. 
And in this creation is extended. 
God gives 
thanks to His extension in His Son. 
His Son gives thanks for his 
creation, in the song of his creating in his Father's Name. 
The Love 
They share is what all prayer will be throughout eternity, when time 
is done. 
For such it was before time seemed to be. 


S 1 A 2 To you who are in time a little while, prayer takes the form 
that best will suit your need. 
You have but one. 
What God created 
one must recognize its oneness, and rejoice that what illusions 
seemed to separate is one forever in the Mind of God. 
Prayer now 
must be the means by which God's Son leaves separate goals and 
separate interests by, and turns in holy gladness to the truth of 
union in his Father and himself. 


S 1 A 3 Lay down your dreams, you holy Son of God, and rising up 
as God created you, dispense with idols and remember Him. 
Prayer 
will sustain you now, and bless you as you lift your hearts 2 to Him 
in rising song that reaches higher and then higher still until both 
high and low have disappeared. 
Faith in your goal will grow and 
hold you up as you ascend the shining stairway to the lawns of 
Heaven and the gate of peace. 
For this is prayer, and here salvation 
is. 
This is the way. 
It is God's gift to you. 
3 S(2) 


1 Schucman had a policy of capitalizing all pronouns and some attributes of any of the three persons of 
the Trinity. 
In this document the capitalization is very inconsistent. 
Generally we’ve adjusted it to fit 
her policy without footnoting each of the many instances. 


2 Lamentations. 
3:41 Manuscript has “hearts,” handwritten mark-up crosses out the “s”; 

3 FIP omits the next six paragraphs 


VI-1 


1793 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


S 1 A 4 Asking is holy, and it is holy because it is a way of reaching 
God. 
He is the Answerer because you are in need of an Answer. 

No-one can 4 ask for another and receive the Answer for him. 
But 
you can, and indeed you must, help him by offering your love and 
support that his answer 5 be holy and his true need recognized. 
That 
is prayer; it is the same for yourself or for another. 
There is no 
difference. 
If you received the answers for another, there would be a 
difference. 


S 1 A 5 This does not mean that you cannot get messages for 
another, if it is God Who chooses this way of reaching him. 
This 
will usually happen unexpectedly, generally in the form of a sudden 
feeling that you have something to tell him; a message to deliver. 

You have not been wrong in the past about how you have asked, 
but you are ready for a step ahead now. 
There are joint decisions in 
which unanimity of response is a good indication of authenticity. 

This should not be abandoned. 
But asking is a lesson in trust, and 
no-one can trust for another. 
He can only strengthen another's trust 
by offering it to him and having faith in his ability to hear for 
himself. 


S 1 A 6 Asking is the way to God because it offers us 6 His Will as 
He would have us 7 hear it. 
We will have a series of lessons on 
asking because you have not understood it. 
But do not think 
because of that that you have been mistaken in your attempts. 
You 
have done well and will do better. 
S(3) 

S 1 A 7 Any specific question involves a large number of 
assumptions which inevitably limit the answer. 
A specific question 
is actually a decision about the kind of answer that is 8 acceptable. 



4 Handwritten mark-up suggests “You cannot” 

5 Handwritten mark-up suggests “asking” 

6 Typed in brackets (you) 

7 Typed in brackets (you) 

8 “G” replaces “the kind of answer that is” with “what kind of answer would be”. 
In these footnotes for 
the Song of Prayer “G” refers to a version of this volume published by Gene Ward Smith which 
footnotes variant readings from an undetermined source. 
Unfortunately I have been unable to identify 
precisely what Smith’s source was but I suspect it is another and different typed scribal manuscript, 
giving these footnotes some genuine authority. 
This is a matter which will have to be clarified with 
further research. 



VI-2 


1794 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


The purpose of words is to limit, and by limiting to make a vast area 
of experience 9 more manageable. 
But that means manageable by 
YOU. 
For many aspects of living in this world that is necessary. 
But 
not for asking. 
God does not use words and does not answer in 
words. 
He can only "speak" 10 to the Christ in you. 
Who translates 
His Answer * 11 into whatever language you can understand and 
accept. 
Sometimes words will limit fear; sometimes not. 
That is 
why some people hear words, some 12 receive feelings of inner 
conviction, and some do not become aware of anything. 
Yet God 
has answered, and His Answer will reach you when you are ready. 


S 1 A 8 Answers are not up to you. 
Any limit you place on 13 them 
interferes with hearing. 
God's Voice is silent and speaks in silence. 
14 
That means that you do not phrase the question and you do not 
restrict the answer. 


S 1 A 9 Asking is 15 prayer. 
It is not a demand. 
It is not questioning. 

It is not limitation. 
The only real request is for God's Answer. 
It 16 
needs the humility of trust, not the arrogance of false certainty. 


Trust cannot lie in idols, for that is merely faith in magic. 
17 Trust 
requires faith that God understands, knows, and will answer. 
It 
means a state of peace. 
For this you can 18 safely ask. 
In fact, if you 
do not feel that you 19 have it, asking for it is the only real request 20 
you can make. 



9 “G” omits “of experience” 

10 FIP omits quotation marks 

11 “G” doesn’t capitalize “His Answer” 

12 FIP adds “people” 

13 “G” has “upon” instead of “on” 

14 1 Kings 19:12, Ps. 
46:10 

15 Handwritten mark-up suggests “a fonn of’ 

16 Handwritten mark-up suggests “Thus it” or perhaps this is suggesting “This” in place of “it” ... 
it is 
somewhat ambiguous. 


17 Handwritten mark-up suggests paragraph break here. 


18 FIP has “may” 

19 “G:” omits “feel that you” 

20 Handwritten mark-up suggests “that” 


1795 


VI-3 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

B. 
True Prayer 

S 1 B 1 Prayer is a 21 way offered by the Holy Spirit to reach God. 
It 
is not merely a question or an entreaty. 
It cannot succeed until you 
realize that it asks for nothing. 
How else could it serve its purpose? 
It is impossible to pray for idols and hope to reach God. 
True 
prayer must avoid the pitfall of asking to entreat. 
Ask rather to 
receive what is already given; 22 to accept what is already there. 


S 1 B 2 You have been told to ask the Holy Spirit for the answer to 
any specific S(4) problem, and that you will receive a specific 
answer if such is your need. 
You have also been told that there is 
only one problem and one answer. 
In prayer this is not 
contradictory. 
There are decisions to make here, and they must be 
made whether they be illusions or not. 
You cannot be asked to 
accept answers which are beyond the level of need that 23 you 24 
recognize. 
25 Therefore it is not the form of the question that matters, 
nor how it is asked. 
The form of the answer, if given by God 
through His Voice, 26 will suit your need as you see it. 
This is merely 
an echo of the reply of His Voice. 
The real sound is always a song of 
thanksgiving and love. 
27 

S 1 B 3 We 28 cannot, then, ask for the echo. 
It is the song that is the 
gift. 
Along with it come the overtones, the harmonics, the echoes, 
but these are secondary. 
In true prayer you hear only the song. 
All 
the rest is merely added. 
You have sought first the Kingdom of 
Heaven, 29 and all else has indeed been given you. 
30 


21 Manuscript does not have the “a” here, it is a handwritten correction 

22 Matthew 7:7 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened 
to you.” 

23 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “that” 

24 FIP inserts “can” here 

23 Handwritten mark-up indicates paragraph break at this point. 


2< ’Handwritten mark-up crosses out “through His Voice” 

27 FIP has “of Love” 

28 “We” is crossed out and “You” is penciled in. 


29 Handwritten mark-up appears to cross out the comma. 


30 Matthew 6:33 “But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be 
added to you.” 


VI-4 


1796 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


S 1 B 4 The secret of true prayer is to forget the things you think 
you need. 
To ask for the specific is much the same as to look on sin 
and then forgive it. 
Also in the same way, in prayer you overlook 
your specific needs as you see them, and let them go into His 31 
hands. 
There they become your gifts to Him, for they tell Him that 
you would have no gods before Him; 32 no Love 33 but His. 
34 What 
could His Answer be but your remembrance of Him? Can this be 
traded for a bit of trifling advice about a problem of an instant's 
duration? God answers only for eternity. 
But still all little answers 
are contained in this. 


S 1 B 5 Prayer is a stepping aside; a letting go; a quiet time of 
listening and loving. 
It should not be confused with supplication of 
any kind, because it is a way of remembering your holiness. 
Why 
should holiness entreat, being fully entitled to everything love has 
to offer? And it is to Love one goes 35 in prayer. 
Prayer is an 
offering; a giving up of oneself 36 to be at one with Love. 
There is 
nothing to ask because there is nothing left to want. 
That 
nothingness becomes the altar of God. 
It disappears in Him. 
S(5) 

S 1 B 6 This is not a level of prayer that everyone can attain as yet. 

Those who have not 37 need your help in prayer because their asking 
is not yet based upon acceptance. 
Help in prayer does not mean 
that another mediates between you and God. 
But it does mean that 
another can stand 38 beside you and help 39 to raise you up to Him. 

One who has realized the goodness of God prays without fear. 
And 
one who prays without fear cannot but reach Him. 
He can therefore 
also reach His Son, wherever he may be and whatever form he may 
seem to take. 



31 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change this to “God’s” 

33 Exodus 20:3 “You shall have no other gods before Me.” 

33 Manuscript is in lower case, handwritten mark-up corrects it to upper case. 


34 The word (Him) is typed in brackets and crossed out. 


35 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “you go” 

36 Crossed out with “yourself’ penciled in. 


37 FIP adds “reached it still”, handwritten mark-up adds “still.” the original typing is crossed out and 
reads “Until they (He) do they ...” 

38 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “can” and pluralizes “stand” to “stands" 

39 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have this as “helps” instead of “help” 


1797 


VI-5 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


S 1 B 7 Praying to Christ in anyone is true prayer because it is a gift 
of thanks to his Father. 
To ask that Christ be but Himself is not an 
entreaty but it IS 40 a song of thanksgiving for what you are. 
Herein 
lies the power of prayer. 
It asks nothing and receives everything. 

This prayer can be shared because it receives for everyone. 
To pray 
with one who knows that this is true is to be answered. 
Perhaps the 
specific form of solution 41 for a specific problem will occur to either 
of you; it does not matter which. 
Perhaps it will reach both, if you 
are genuinely attuned to one another. 
It will come because you 
have realized that it does not matter. 
Therein lies its only truth . 
42 

C. 
The Ladder of Prayer 

S 1 C 1 Prayer has no beginning and no end. 
It is a part of life. 
But 
it does change in form, and grows with learning until it reaches its 
formless state, and fuses into total communication with God. 
In its 
asking form it need not, and often does not, make appeal to God, or 
even involve belief in Him. 
At that level 43 prayer is merely wanting, 
out of a sense of scarcity and lack. 


S 1 C 2 The prayer, or asking-out-of-need , 44 always involves 
feelings of weakness and inadequacy, and could never be made by a 
Son of God who knows Who he is. 
No-one, then, who is sure of his 
Identity could pray in this form . 
45 Yet it is also true that no-one who 
is uncertain of his Identity could 46 avoid praying in this way. 
And 
prayer is as continual as life. 
Everyone prays without ceasing . 
47 


40 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “but it is” , FIP inserts sentence break after “entreaty” and leaves 
out “but” and the handwritten mark-up may do that also, legibility is not good. 


41 FIP changes “solution” to “resolution” 

42 Handwritten mark-up suggests “Christ is in both of you. 
That is its only truth.” 

43 Handwritten mark-up suggests “these levels” 

44 Handwritten mark-up replaces “for” with “or”. 
FIP rewrites this as “These forms of prayer, or 
asking... 
involve” Some think it was supposed to be “That prayer, or asking out of need, always 
involves” as this requires the fewest alterations of the text to achieve grammatical and logical sense. 

Manuscript has “The prayer for asking-out-of-need” 

45 FIP changes “this form” to “these forms” 

46 Handwritten mark-up suggests “can” 

47 1 Thessalonians 5:17 “Pray without ceasing,” 


VI-6 


1798 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


Ask and you have received , 48 for you have established what it is S(6) 
you want. 


S 1 C 3 It is also possible to reach a higher form of asking-out-of¬ 
need, for in this world prayer must be used for reparation , 49 and so 
it must entail levels of learning. 
Here, the asking may be addressed 
to God in honest belief, though not yet with understanding. 
A 
vague and usually unstable sense of identification has generally 
been reached, but it 50 tends to be blurred by a deep-rooted sense of 
sin. 
It is possible at this level to continue to ask for things of this 
world in various forms, but 51 it is also possible to ask for qualities 52 
such as honesty or goodness, and particularly for forgiveness for the 
many sources of guilt that inevitably underlie any prayer of need. 

Without guilt there is no scarcity. 
The sinless have no needs. 


S 1 C 4 At this level also comes 53 that curious contradiction in terms 
known as "praying for one's enemies." The contradiction lies not in 
the actual words, but 54 in the way they are usually interpreted. 

While you believe you have enemies, you have limited prayer to the 
laws of this world, and 55 limited your ability to receive and 56 accept 
to the same narrow margins. 
And yet, if you have enemies you 
have need of prayer, and great need, too. 
What does the phrase 
really mean? Pray for yourself, that you may not seek to imprison 
Christ and thereby lose the recognition of your own Identity. 
Be 
traitor to no-one, or you will be treacherous to yourself. 
An enemy 
is the symbol for 57 an imprisoned Christ. 
And who could He be 
except yourself? 


48 Matthew. 
7:7-8 “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be 
opened to you. 
For everyone who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it will 
be opened.” Also see Luke. 
ll:19;John 17:7;16:23 

49 FIP has “is reparative” instead of “must be used for reparation” 

50 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “it” 

51 FIP replaces “but” with “and” 

52 Handwritten mark-up replaces “qualities” with “gifts” 

53 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “comes” and adds “begins” at the end of this sentence. 
FIP retains 
original reading. 


54 Handwritten mark-up inserts “rather” 

55 Handwritten mark-up inserts “have also” 

56 FIP adds “to” 

57 FIP changes “for” to “of’ 


1799 


VI-7 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


S 1 C 5 The prayer for enemies thus becomes a prayer for your own 
freedom. 
Now it is no longer a contradiction in terms. 
Rather it is 58 
a statement of the unity of Christ and a recognition of His 
sinlessness. 
And now it has become holy, for it acknowledges the 
Son of God as he was created. 


S 1 C 6 Let it never be forgotten that prayer at any level is always 
for yourself. 
If you unite with anyone in prayer, you make him part 
of you. 
The enemy 59 is you, as is the Christ. 
Before it can become 
holy, then, prayer becomes a choice. 
You do not choose for another. 

You can but choose for yourself. 
Pray truly for your enemies, S(7) 
then, for herein lies your own salvation. 
Forgive them for your sins, 
and you will be forgiven indeed. 


S 1 C 7 Prayer is a ladder reaching up to Heaven . 
60 At the top there 
is a transformation much like your own, for prayer is part of you. 

The things of earth are left behind, all unremembered. 
There is no 
asking, for there is no lack. 
Identity in Christ is fully recognized as 
set forever, beyond all change and incorruptible. 
The light no 
longer flickers, and will never go out. 


S 1 C 8 Now, without needs of any kind, and clad forever in the 
pure sinlessness which 61 is the gift of God to you. 
His Son, prayer 
can again become what it was meant to be. 
For now it rises as a 
song of thanks to your Creator, sung without words, or thoughts, or 
vain desires, unneedful now of anything at all. 
So it extends, as it 
was meant to do. 
And for this giving God Himself gives thanks. 


S 1 C 9 God is the goal of every prayer, giving it timelessness 
instead of end. 
Nor has it a 62 beginning, because the goal has never 
changed. 
Prayer in its earlier forms is an illusion, because there is 
no need for a ladder to reach what one has never left. 
Yet prayer is 
part of forgiveness as long as forgiveness, itself an illusion, remains 


58 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “Rather" and changes “it is” to “It has become”. 


59 Handwritten mark-up suggests quotation marks around “enemy” 

60 Genesis 28:12 "And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to 
heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. 
“ 

61 FIP replaces “which" with “that” 

62 Handwritten mark-up suggests “a beginning”, Manuscript omits “a” 


VI-8 


1800 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


unattained. 
Prayer is tied up with learning until the goal of learning 
has been reached. 
And then all things will be transformed together, 
and returned unblemished into the Mind of God. 


S 1 C 10 Being beyond learning, this state cannot be described. 
The 
stages necessary to its attainment, however, need to be understood, 
if peace is to be restored to the Son of God , 63 who lives now with the 
illusion of death and the fear of God. 


D, Praying for Others 

S 1 D 1 We said that prayer is always for yourself, and this is true . 
64 
Why, then, should you pray for others at all? And if you should, 
how should you do it? Praying for others, if rightly understood, 
becomes a means for lifting your projections of guilt from your 
brother, and enabling you to recognize it is not he who is hurting 
you. 
The poisonous thought that he IS your enemy, your evil 
counterpart, your nemesis, must be relinquished before YOU can be 
saved from guilt. 
For this the means is prayer, of rising power and 
with ascending S(8) goals, until it reaches even up to God. 


S 1 D 2 The earlier forms of prayer, at the bottom of the ladder, will 
not be free from envy and even 65 malice. 
They call for vengeance, 
not for love. 
Nor do they come from one who understands that they 
are calls for death, made out of fear by those who cherish guilt. 


They call upon a vengeful god, and it is he who seems to answer 
them. 
Hell cannot be asked for another, and then escaped by him 
who asks for this . 
66 Only those who are in hell can ask for hell. 

Those who have been forgiven, and who have 67 accepted their 
forgiveness, could never make a prayer like this . 
68 
S 1 D 3 At this level , 69 then, the learning goal must be to recognize 
that prayer will bring an answer only in the form in which the 


' Handwritten mark-up suggests “God’s Son” 

64 FIP replaces “true” with “so” 

65 FIP omits “even” 

66 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggests “it” 

67 FIP omits “have” 

68 FIP replaces “this” with “that” 

69 Handwritten mark-up and FIP have “these levels” 


1801 


VI-9 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

prayer was made. 
This is enough. 
From here it will be an easy step 
to the next level . 
70 It 71 begins with this: 

"What I have asked for for my brother is not what I would have. 
Thus 
have I made of him my enemy. 
" 72 

S 1 D 4 It is apparent that this step cannot be reached by anyone 
who sees no value nor 73 advantage to himself in setting others free. 

This may be long delayed, because this step 74 may seem to be 
dangerous instead of merciful. 
To the guilty there seems indeed to 
be a real advantage in having enemies, and this imagined gain 75 
must go, if enemies are to be set free. 
Guilt must be given up, and 
not concealed. 
Nor can it be 76 without some pain, and a glimpse of 
the merciful nature of this step may for some time be followed by a 
deep retreat into fear. 
For fear's defenses are fearful in themselves, 
and when they are recognized they bring their fear with them. 


S 1 D 5 Yet what advantage has an illusion of escape ever brought a 
prisoner? H i s real escape from guilt can lie only in the recognition 
that the guilt has gone. 
And how can this be recognized as long as 
he hides it in another, and does not see it as his own? Fear of escape 
makes it difficult to welcome freedom, and to make a jailer of an 
enemy seems to be safety. 
Flow, then, can he be released without an 
insane fear for yourself? You have made of him your salvation and 
your S(9) escape from guilt. 
Your investment in this escape is 
heavy, and your fear of letting 77 go is strong. 


S 1 D 6 Stand still an instant, now, and think what you have done. 

Do not forget that it is you who did it, and who can therefore let it 
go. 
Tlold out your hand; this enemy has come to bless you. 
Take 
his blessing and feel how your heart is lifted and your fear released. 

Do not hold on to it, nor onto him. 
Fie is a Son of God, along with 


70 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “level” to “levels” 

71 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “it” with “The next ascent” 

72 FIP omits quotes 

73 FIP has “or” instead of “nor” 

74 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “this step” with “it” 

75 Manuscript has “game” corrected by handwritten mark-up and FIP to “gain” 

76 FIP and handwritten mark-up suggest “this be done” 

77 FIP has “letting it go” 


VI-10 


1802 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


you. 
He is no jailer, but a messenger of Christ. 
Be this to him, that 
you may see him thus. 


S 1 D 7 It is not easy to realize that prayers for things, for status, 78 
for external "gifts" of any kind, are always made to set up jailers 79 
and to hide from guilt. 
Yet these things, too, 80 are used for goals 
that substitute for God, and therefore distort the purpose of prayer. 

The desire for them IS the prayer. 
One need not ask explicitly. 
The 
goal of God is lost in the quest for lesser goals of any kind, and 
prayer becomes requests for enemies. 
The power of prayer can be 
quite clearly recognized even in this. 
No-one who wants an enemy 
will fail to find one. 
But just as surely will he lose the only true goal 
that is given him. 
Think of the cost, and understand it well. 
All 
other goals are at the cost of God. 


E. 
Praying with Others 

S 1 E 1 Until the second step 81 at least begins, one cannot share in 
prayer, 82 for until that point, each one must ask for different things. 

But once the need to hold the other as an enemy has been 
questioned, and the reason 83 has been recognized if only for an 
instant, it becomes 84 possible to join in prayer. 
Enemies do not share 
a goal, and it is here 85 their enmity is kept. 
Their separate wishes are 
their arsenals; their fortresses in hate. 
The key to rising further still 
in prayer lies in this simple thought; this change of mind: 

We go together, you and I. 


S 1 E 2 Now it is possible to help in prayer, and so reach up 
yourself. 
This step begins the quicker ascent, but there are still 
many lessons 86 to learn. 
The way is open, and hope is justified. 
Yet 


78 The word “attributes” is typed and struck out, the word “status” being put in its place. 
Handwritten 
mark-up and FIP suggest adding “for human love,” here. 


79 initially typed “a jailer” this is crossed out and “jailers” typed above. 


80 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “Yet these things, too, to “These things are” 

81 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “step” with “level” and omit “at least” 

82 FIP inserts sentence break here. 


83 FIP inserts “for doing so” 

84 Handwritten mark-up suggests “at least” 

85 Handwritten mark-up and FIP remove “and”, beginning a new sentence with “It is in this their 
enmity” 

86 The word “yet” is overstruck out in the Manuscript here. 



1803 


VI-11 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

it is likely at first that what is asked for even by those who join 87 in 
prayer is not the goal that prayer S(10) should truly seek. 
Even 
together they 88 may ask for things, and thus set up but an illusion of 
a goal they 89 share. 
They 90 may ask together for specifics, and not 
realize that they 91 are asking for effects without the cause. 
And this 
they 92 cannot have. 
For no-one can receive effects alone, and 
choose 93 a cause from which they do not come to offer them to him. 

Even the joining, then, is not enough, if those who pray together do 
not ask, before all else, what is the Will of God. 
From this Cause 
only can the Answer 94 come in which are all specifics satisfied; all 
separate wishes unified in one. 


S 1 E 3 Prayers 95 for specifics always ask 96 to have the past repeated 
in some way. 
What was enjoyed before, or seemed to be, — what 
was 97 another's and he seemed to like, 98 — all these are but illusions 
from the past. 
The aim of prayer is to release the present from its 
chains of past illusions; to let it be a freely chosen remedy from 
every choice that stood for a mistake. 
What prayer can offer now so 
far exceeds all that you asked before that it is pitiful to be content 
with less. 


S 1 E 4 You have 99 a newborn-chance each time you pray. 
And 
would you stifle and imprison it in ancient prisons, when the chance 
has come to free yourself from all of them at once? Do not restrict 
your asking. 
Prayer can bring the peace of God. 
What time-bound 
thing can give you more than this, in just the little space that lasts 
until it crumbles into dust? 


s7 Handwritten mark-up suggests “sometimes” 

88 FIP changes “they” to “you” 

85 FIP changes “they” to “you” 

90 FIP changes “they” to “you” 

91 FIP changes “they” to “you” 

92 FIP changes “they” to “you” 

93 Handwritten mark-up suggests “ask”, FIP uses “asking” 

94 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “Answer” to “answer” 

95 FIP has the singular “Prayer” 

96 FIP has “asks” 

97 Manuscript has “is”, handwritten mark-up and FIP correct this to “was” 

98 FIP has “love” 

99 FIP inserts “chosen” 


VI-12 


1804 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


F. 
The Ladder Ends 

S 1 F 1 Prayer is a way to true humility. 
But 100 here again it rises 101 
up, slowly at first, 102 and grows in strength and love and holiness. 

Let it but leave the ground where it begins to rise to God, and true 
humility will come at last to grace the mind that thought it was 
alone and stood against the world. 
Humility brings peace because it 
does not claim that you must rule the universe, nor 103 judge all 
things as you would have them be. 
All little gods it gladly lays 
aside, not in resentment, but in honesty and recognition that they 
did 104 not serve. 


S 1 F 2 Illusions and humility have goals so far apart they cannot 
coexist, S(ll) nor share a dwelling place. 
105 Where one has come the 
other disappears. 
The truly humble have no goal but God because 
they need no idols, and defense no longer has 106 a purpose. 
Enemies 
are useless now, because humility does not oppose. 
It does not hide 
in shame because it is content with what it is, knowing creation is 
the Will of God. 
Its selflessness is Self, and this it sees in every 
meeting, where it gladly joins with every Son of God, whose purity 
it recognizes that it shares with him. 
Now prayer is lifted from the 
world of things, of bodies, and of gods of every kind, and you can 
rest in holiness at last. 
Humility has taught 107 you how to 
understand your glory as God's Son, and recognize the arrogance of 
sin. 
A dream has veiled the face of Christ from you. 
Now can you 
look upon His sinlessness. 


S 1 F 3 High has the ladder risen. 
You have come almost to 
Heaven. 
There is little more to learn before the journey is complete. 

Now 108 you say to everyone who 109 joins in prayer with you: 


100 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “But” to "And” 

101 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “slowly” 

102 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “slowly at first” 

103 Manuscript has “or” corrected to “nor” by handwritten mark-up 

104 FIP has “do” 

l(b Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “where they can meet” “G” notes that insertion creates IP 

106 FIP changes “has” to “serves” 

107 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggest “has come to teach” 

108 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggest “can” 

109 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggest “comes to join” 


1805 


VI-13 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

"I cannot go without you, for you are a part of me." 

And so he is in truth. 
Now must 110 you pray only for what you truly 
share with him. 
For you have understood he never left, and you, 
who seemed alone, are one with him. 


S 1 F 4 The ladder ends with this, for learning is no longer needed. 

Now you stand before the gate of Heaven, and your brother stands 
beside you there. 
The lawns are deep and still, for here the place 
appointed for the time when you should come has waited long for 
you. 
Here will time end forever. 
At this gate eternity itself will join 
with you. 
Prayer has become what it was meant to be, for you have 
recognized the Christ in you. 
S(12) 

Forgiveness 

A. 
Introduction 

S 2 A 1 Forgiveness offers wings to prayer, to make its rising easy 
and its progress swift. 
Without its strong support it would be vain 
to try to rise above the * 111 bottom step, or even to attempt to climb at 
all. 
Forgiveness is prayer's ally; sister in the plan for your salvation. 

Both must come to hold you up and keep your feet secure; your 
purpose steadfast and unchangeable. 
Behold the greatest help that 
God ordained to be with you until you reach to Him. 
Illusion's end 
will come with this. 
Unlike the timeless nature of its sister prayer, 
forgiveness has an end, for it becomes unneeded when the rising up 
is done. 
Yet now it has a purpose beyond which you cannot go, nor 
have you need to go. 
Accomplish this and you have been 
redeemed. 
Accomplish this and you have been transformed. 

Accomplish this and you will save the world. 


B. 
Forgiveness of Yourself 

S 2 B 1 No gift of Heaven has been more misunderstood than has 
forgiveness. 
It has, in fact, become a scourge; a curse where it was 
meant to bless, a cruel mockery of grace, a parody upon the holy 


110 Handwritten mark-up, FIP suggest “can” instead of “must” 

111 FIP replaces “the” with “Prayer’s” 


VI-14 


1806 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


peace of God. 
Yet those who have not yet elected 112 to begin the 
steps of prayer cannot but use it thus. 
Forgiveness's 113 kindness is 
obscure at first, because salvation is not understood, NOR TRULY 
SOUGHT FOR. 
What was meant to heal is used to hurt because 
forgiveness is not wanted. 
Guilt becomes salvation, and the remedy 
appears to be a terrible alternative to life. 


S 2 B 2 Forgiveness-to-destroy will therefore suit the purpose of the 
world far better than its true objective, and the honest means by 
which this goal is reached. 
Forgiveness-to-destroy will overlook no 
sin, no crime, no guilt that it can 114 find and "love." Dear to its heart 
is error, and mistakes loom large and grow and swell within its 
sight. 
It carefully picks out all evil things, and overlooks the loving 
as a plague; a hateful thing of danger and of death. 
Forgiveness-to- 
destroy IS death, 115 and this it sees in everything 116 S(13) it looks 
upon and hates. 
God's mercy has become a twisted knife that 
would destroy the holy Son He loves. 


S 2 B 3 Would you forgive yourself for doing this? Then learn that 
God has given you a 117 means by which you can return to Him in 
peace. 
DO NOT SEE ERROR. 
Do not make it real. 
Select the loving 
and forgive the sin by choosing in its place the face of Christ. 
How 
otherwise can prayer return to God? He loves His Son. 
Can you 
remember Him and hate what He created? You will hate his Father 
if you hate the Son He loves. 
For as you see the Son you see 
yourself, and as you see yourself is God to you. 
118 
S 2 B 4 As prayer is always for yourself, so is forgiveness 119 given 
you. 
It is impossible to forgive another, for it is only your sins you 


112 FIP has “chosen” 

113 FIP and the Manuscript both have “Forgiveness”’, or “s apostrophe” which would be correct if 
“forgiveness” were a plural possessive case, but it is a singular possessive case, so it should be 
“apostrophe s” -- From "A Manual of Style" (12th ed., University of Chicago Press, 1969): 

114 Handwritten mark-up, FIP add “seek and” 

115 Romans 6:23 “For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our 
Lord.” 

116 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “everything” to “all” 

117 FIP changes “a” to “the” 

118 Matthew 25:40 “And the King will answer and say to them, ‘Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as 
you did it to one of the least of these My brethren, you did it to Me.'” 

119 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “always” 


1807 


VI-15 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


see in him. 
You want to see them there, and not in you. 
That is why 
forgiveness of another is an illusion. 
Yet it is the only happy dream 
in all the world; the only one that does not lead to death. 
Only in 
someone else can you forgive yourself, for you have called him 
guilty of your sins, and in him must your innocence 120 be found. 

Who but the sinful need to be forgiven? And do not ever think you 
can see sin in anyone except yourself. 


S 2 B 5 This is the great deception of the world, and you the great 
deceiver of yourself. 
It always seems to be another who is evil, and 
in his sin you are the injured one. 
How could freedom be possible if 
this were true? 121 You would be slave to everyone, for what he does 
entails your fate, your feelings, your despair or hope, your misery or 
joy. 
You have no freedom unless he gives it to you. 
And being evil, 
he can only give of what he is. 
You cannot see his sins and not your 
own. 
But you can free him and yourself as well. 


S 2 B 6 Forgiveness, truly given, is the only way in which your 122 
hope of freedom lies. 
Others will make mistakes and so will you, as 
long as this illusion of a world appears to be your home. 
God 123 has 
given all His Sons a remedy for all illusions that they think they see. 

Christ's vision does not use your eyes, but you can look through His 
and learn to see like Him. 
Mistakes are tiny shadows, quickly gone, 
which 124 for an instant only seem S(14) to hide the face of Christ, 
which still remains unchanged behind them all. 
His constancy 
remains in tranquil silence and in perfect peace. 
He does not know 
of shadows. 
His the eyes that look past error to the Christ in you. 


S 2 B 7 Ask then His help, and ask Him how to learn forgiveness as 
His vision lets it be. 
You are in need of what He gives, and your 
salvation rests on learning this of Him. 
Prayer cannot be released to 
Heaven while forgiveness-to-destroy remains with you. 
God's 


120 FIP suggests “now” 

121 FIP suggests “so” 

'" 2 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “only” here, removing the immediately previous instance of 
“only” 

Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “Yet God Himself’ 

124 FIP changes “which” to “that” 


VI-16 


1808 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


mercy would remove this withering and poisoned thinking from 
your holy mind. 
Christ has forgiven you, and in His sight the world 
is 125 holy as Himself. 
Who sees no evil in it sees like Him, for what 
He has forgiven has not sinned, and guilt can be no more. 


Salvation's plan is made complete, and sanity has come. 


S 2 B 8 Forgiveness is the call to sanity, for who but the insane 
would look on sin when he could see the face of Christ instead? 

This is the choice you make; the simplest one, and yet the only one 
that you can make. 
God calls on you to save His Son from death by 
offering the love of Christ 126 to him. 
This is your need, and God 
Himself 127 holds out this gift to you. 
As He would give, so must you 
give as well. 
And thus is prayer restored to formlessness, beyond 
all limits into timelessness, with nothing of the past to hold it back 
from re-uniting with the ceaseless song that all creation sings unto 
its God. 
S(15) 

S 2 B 9 But to achieve this end you first must learn, before you 
reach where learning cannot go. 
Forgiveness is the key, but who 
can use a key when he has lost the door for which the key was 
made, and where alone it fits? Therefore we make distinctions, so 
that prayer can be released from darkness into light. 


Forgiveness's 128 role must be reversed, and cleansed from evil 
usages and hateful goals. 
Forgiveness-to-destroy must be unveiled 
in all its treachery, and then let go forever and forever. 
There can be 
no trace of it remaining, if the plan that God established for 
returning be achieved at last, and learning be complete. 


S 2 B 10 This is the world of opposites. 
And you must choose 
between them every instant while this world retains reality for you. 

Yet you must learn alternatives for choice, or you will not be able to 
attain your freedom. 
Let it then be clear to you exactly what 


125 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “becomes as” 

126 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “Christ’s Love” 

127 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “Himself’ 

128 FIP and the Manuscript both have “Forgiveness”’, or “s apostrophe” which would be correct if 
“forgiveness” were a plural possessive case, but it is a singular possessive case, so it should be 
“apostrophe s” -- From "A Manual of Style” (12th ed., University of Chicago Press, 1969): 


1809 


VI-17 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

forgiveness means to you, and learn what it should be to set you 
free. 
The level of your prayer 129 depends on this, for here it waits its 
freedom to ascend above the world of chaos into peace. 


C. 
Forgiveness-to-destroy 

S 2 C 1 Forgiveness-to-destroy has many forms, being a weapon of 
the world of form. 
Not all of them are obvious, and some are 
carefully concealed beneath what seems like charity. 
Yet all the 
forms that it may 130 take have but one 131 goal; their purpose is to 
separate and make what God created equal, different. 
The 
difference is clear in several forms where the designed comparison 
cannot be missed, nor is it 132 meant to be. 


S 2 C 2 In this group, first, there are the forms in which a "better" 
person deigns to stoop to save a baser 133 one from what he 134 is. 

Forgiveness here rests solely on the base 135 of gracious lordliness so 
far from love that arrogance could never be dislodged. 
Who can 
forgive and yet despise? And who can tell another he is steeped in 
sin, and yet perceive him as the Son of God? Who makes a slave to 
teach what freedom is? There is no union here, but only grief. 
This 
is not 136 mercy. 
This is death. 


S 2 C 3 Another form, still very like the first if it is understood, does 
not appear in quite such blatant arrogance. 
The one who would 
forgive the S(16) other does not claim to be the better. 
Now he 
merely 137 says 138 that here is one whose sinfulness he shares, since 
both have been unworthy and deserve the retribution of the wrath 
of God. 
This can appear to be a humble act, 139 and can 140 indeed 


129 Originally plural, the typist overstruck the “s” making it singular. 
FIP keeps it singular. 


10 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “seem to” 

131 Handwritten mark-up and FIP suggest “this single” 

132 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “really” 

133 FIP adds quotes around “baser” 

134 Handwritten mark-up suggests really, crossed out and replaces with “truly” which FIP keeps. 


135 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replaces “solely on the base” with “on an attitude” 

136 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “really” 

137 Handwritten mark-up and FIP delete “merely” 

138 Handwritten mark-up and FIP insert “instead” 

139 FIP changes “act” to “thought” 

140 FIP changes “can” to “may” 


VI-18 


1810 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


become 141 a rivalry in baseness 142 and in guilt. 
It is not love for 
God's creation and the holiness that is His gift forever. 
Can His Son 
condemn himself and still remember Him? 

S 2 C 4 Here the goal is to separate from God the Son He loves, and 
keep him from his Source. 
This goal is also sought by those who 
seek the role of martyr at another's hand. 
Here must the aim be 
clearly seen, for this may pass as meekness and as charity instead of 
cruelty. 
Is it not kind to be accepting of another's spite, and not 
respond except with silence and a gentle smile? Behold, how good 
are you who bear with patience and with saintliness the anger and 
the hurt another gives, and do not show the bitter pain you feel. 


S 2 C 5 Forgiveness-to-destroy will often hide behind a cloak like 
this. 
It shows the face of suffering and pain, in silent proof of guilt 
and of the ravages of sin. 
Such is the witness that it offers one who 
could be savior, not an enemy. 
But having made him 143 enemy, he 
must accept the guilt and heavy-laid reproach that thus is put upon 
him. 
Is this love? Or is it rather treachery to one who needs 
salvation from the pain of guilt? What is it for, 144 except to keep the 
witnesses of guilt away from love? 

S 2 C 6 Forgiveness-to-destroy can also take the form of bargaining 
and compromise. 
"I will forgive you if you meet my needs, for in 
your slavery is my release." Say this to anyone and you are slave. 

And you will seek to rid yourself of guilt in further bargains which 
can give no hope, but only greater pain and misery. 
How fearful 
has forgiveness now become, and how distorted is the end it seeks. 

Have mercy on yourself who bargained 145 thus. 
God gives and does 
not ask for recompense. 
There is no giving but to give like Him. 
All 
else is mockery. 
For who would try to strike a bargain with the Son 
of God, and thank his Father for his holiness? S(17) 


141 FIP changes “become” to “induce” 

l4 “ Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “baseness and in” to "sinfulness and guilt” 

143 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change "made him” to “been made” 

144 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “is it for” to “could the purpose be” 

145 FIP changes this to the present tense, “bargains” 


1811 


VI-19 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


S 2 C 7 What would you show your brother? Would you try to 
reinforce his guilt and thus your own? Forgiveness is the means for 
your escape. 
How pitiful it is to make of it a 146 means for further 
slavery and pain. 
Within the world of opposites there is a way to 
use forgiveness for the goal of God, and find the peace He offers 
you. 
Take nothing else, or you have sought your death, and prayed 
for separation from your Self. 
Christ is for all because He is in all. 
147 
It is His face forgiveness lets you see. 
It is His face in which you 
see 148 your own. 


S 2 C 8 All forms forgiveness takes that do not lead away from 
anger, condemnation, and comparisons of every kind are death. 
For 
that is what their purposes have set. 
Be not deceived by them, but 
lay them by as worthless in their tragic offerings. 
You do not want 
to stay in slavery. 
You do not want to be afraid of God. 
You want 
to see the sunlight and the glow of Heaven shining on the face of 
earth, redeemed from sin and in the Love of God. 
From here is 
prayer released, along with you. 
Your wings are free, and prayer 
will lift you up and bring you home where God would have you be. 


D. 
Forgiveness-for-Salvation 

S 2 D 1 Forgiveness-for-salvation has one form, and only one. 
It 
does not ask for proof of innocence, nor pay of any kind. 
It does not 
argue, nor evaluate the errors that it wants to overlook. 
It does not 
offer gifts in treachery, nor promise freedom while it asks for death. 

Would God deceive you? He but asks for trust and willingness to 
learn how to be free. 
He gives His Teacher to whoever asks, and 
seeks to understand the Will of God. 
His readiness to give lies far 
beyond your understanding and your simple grasp. 
Yet He has 
willed you learn the way to Him, and in His willing there is 
certainty. 



6 FIP changes “a” to “the” 

147 1 Corinthians 15:28 “Now when all things are made subject to Him, then the Son Himself will also 
be subject to Him who put all things under Him, that God may be all in all.” 

148 Manuscript does not contain “you see”, but this correction is handwritten in. 



VI-20 


1812 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


S 2 D 2 You Child of God, the gifts of God are yours, not by your 
plans but by His holy Will. 
His Voice will teach you what 
forgiveness is, and how to give it as He wills it be. 
Do not, then, 
seek to understand what is beyond you yet, but let it be a way to 
draw you up to where the sight 149 of Christ becomes the eyes 150 you 
choose. 
Give up all else, for there IS nothing else. 
When someone 
S(18) calls for help in any form. 
He is the One to answer for you. 
All 
that you need do is to step back and not to interfere. 
Forgiveness- 
for-salvation is His task, and it is He Who will respond for you. 


S 2 D 3 Do not establish what the form should be that His 151 
forgiveness takes. 
He knows the way to make of every call a help to 
you, as you arise in haste to go at last unto your Father's house. 
152 
He will direct 153 your footsteps surely, 154 and 155 your words sincere; 


l4< ’ Handwritten mark-up and FIL change “sight” to “eyes” and the verb “becomes” is changed to 
“become” 

150 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “eyes” to “sight” 

151 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “His” to “Christ’s” 

152 Luke 15:11-32 Then He said: "A certain man had two sons. 
And the younger of them said to his 
father, "Father, give me the portion of goods that falls to me.' So he divided to them his livelihood. 
And 
not many days after, the younger son gathered all together, journeyed to a far country, and there wasted 
his possessions with prodigal living. 
But when he had spent all, there arose a severe famine in that land, 
and he began to be in want. 
Then he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country, and he sent 
him into his fields to feed swine. 
And he would gladly have filled his stomach with the pods that the 
swine ate, and no one gave him anything. 
"But when he came to himself, he said, "How many of my 
father's hired servants have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will arise and go to 
my father, and will say to him, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you, and I am no 
longer worthy to be called your son. 
Make me like one of your hired servants."' 

"And he arose and came to his father. 
But when he was still a great way off, his father saw him and had 
compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. 
And the son said to him, "Father, I have 
sinned against heaven and in your sight, and am no longer worthy to be called your son.' 

"But the father said to his servants, "Bring out the best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his 
hand and sandals on his feet. 
And bring the fatted calf here and kill it, and let us eat and be merry; for 
this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' And they began to be merry. 


"Now his older son was in the field. 
And as he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and 
dancing. 
So he called one of the servants and asked what these things meant. 
And he said to him, "Your 
brother has come, and because he has received him safe and sound, your father has killed the fatted 
calf.' 

"But he was angry and would not go in. 
Therefore his father came out and pleaded with him. 
So he 
answered and said to his father, "Lo, these many years I have been serving you; I never transgressed 
your commandment at any time; and yet you never gave me a young goat, that I might make merry with 
my friends. 
But as soon as this son of yours came, who has devoured your livelihood with harlots, you 
killed the fatted calf for him.' 

"And he said to him, "Son, you are always with me, and all that I have is yours. 
It was right that we 
should make merry and be glad, for your brother was dead and is alive again, and was lost and is 
found.'" 

153 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “He will direct” to “Now can he make” 


1813 


VI-21 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

not with your own sincerity, but with His Own. 
Let Him take 
charge of how you would forgive, and each occasion then will be to 
you another step to Heaven and to peace. 


S 2 D 4 Are you not weary of imprisonment? God did not choose 
this sorry path for you. 
What you have chosen still can be undone, 
for prayer is merciful and God is just. 
His is a justice He can 
understand, but you cannot as yet. 
Yet 156 will He give the means to 
you to learn of Him, and know at last that condemnation is not real 
and makes illusions in its evil name. 
And yet it matters not the form 
that dreams may seem to take. 
Illusions are untrue. 
God's Will is 
truth, and you are one with Him in Will and purpose. 
Here all 
dreams are done. 


S 2 D 5 "What should I do for this, 157 Your holy Son?” should be the 
only thing you ever ask when help is needed and forgiveness 
sought. 
The form the seeking takes you need not judge. 
But 158 let it 
not be you who sets the form in which forgiveness comes to save 
God's Son. 
The light of Christ in him is his release, and it is this that 
answers to his call. 
Forgive him as the Christ decides you should, 
and be His eyes through which you look on him, and speak for Him 
as well. 
He knows the need; the question and the answer. 
He will 
say exactly what to do in words that you can understand 159 and you 
can also use. 
Do not confuse His function with your own. 
He is the 
Answer; you the one who hears. 


S 2 D 6 And what is it He speaks to you about? About salvation 
and the gift of peace. 
About the end of sin and guilt and death. 

About the role forgiveness has in Him. 
Do you but listen, for He 
will be heard by anyone who calls upon His Name, and S(19) places 
his forgiveness in His hands. 
Forgiveness has been given Him to 
teach, to save it from destruction and to make the means for 

1,4 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “surely” to “sure” 

155 Handwritten mark-up and FIP omit “and” 

156 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “Yet” with “still” 

4 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “this” to “him” 

158 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “But” to "And” 

| 3V The original Manuscript inserts, apparently in error “that you can use as well and that you can also 
use.” 


VI-22 


1814 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


separation, sin and death become again the holy gift of love. 
160 
Prayer is His Own right hand, made free to save as true forgiveness 
is allowed to come from His eternal vigilance and Love. 


S 2 D 7 Listen and learn, and do 161 not judge. 
It is to God you turn 
to hear what you should do. 
His Answer will be clear as morning, 
nor is His forgiveness what you think it is. 
Still does He know, and 
that should be enough. 
Forgiveness has a Teacher Who will fail in 
nothing. 
Rest a while in this; do not attempt to judge forgiveness, 
nor to set it in an earthly frame. 
Let it arise to Christ, Who 
welcomes it as gift to Him. 
He will not leave you comfortless, 162 nor 
fail to send His angels down to answer you in His Own Name. 
He 
stands beside the door to which forgiveness is the only key. 
Give it 
to Him to use instead of you, and you will see the door swing 
silently open upon the shining face of Christ. 
Behold your brother 
there beyond the door; the Son of God as He created him. 
S(20) 

Healing 

A. 
Introduction 

S 3 A 1 Prayer has both aids and witnesses which make the steep 
ascent more gentle and more sure, easing the pain of fear and 
offering the comfort and the promises of hope. 
Forgiveness's 163 
witness and an aid to prayer, a giver of assurance of success in 
ultimate attainment of the goal, is healing. 
Its importance should 
not be too strongly emphasized, for healing is a sign or symbol of 
forgiveness's 164 strength, and only an effect or shadow of a change of 
mind about the goal of prayer. 


B. 
The Cause of Sickness 

S 3 B 1 Do not mistake effect for cause, nor think that sickness is 
apart and separate from what its cause must be. 
It is a sign, a 


160 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “love” with “God” 

161 T I B 26b (4) 

162 John 14:18 “I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you.” 

163 FIP and the Manuscript both have “Forgiveness”’, or “s apostrophe” which would be correct if 
“forgiveness” were a plural possessive case, but it is a singular possessive case, so it should be 
“apostrophe s” — From "A Manual of Style" (12th ed., University of Chicago Press, 1969): 

164 Ibid. 



1815 


VI-23 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

shadow of an evil thought that seems to have reality and to be just, 
according to the usage of the world. 
It is external proof of inner 
"sin," 165 and witnesses to unforgiving thoughts that injure and 
would hurt the Son of God. 
Healing the body is impossible, and 
this is shown by the brief nature of the "cure." The body yet must 
die, and healing it is but a brief delay in its return 166 to dust, 167 where 
it was born and will go back. 
168 

S 3 B 2 The body's source 169 is unforgiveness of the Son of God. 
It 
has not left its source, and in its pain and aging and the mark of 
death upon it this is clearly shown. 
Fearful and frail it seems to be 
to those who think their life is tied to its command and linked to its 
unstable, tiny breath. 
Death stares at them as every moment goes 
irrevocably past their grasping hands, which cannot hold them back. 

And they feel fear as bodies change and sicken. 
For they sense the 
heavy scent of death upon their hearts. 


S 3 B 3 The body can be healed as an effect of true forgiveness. 


Only that can give remembrance 170 of immortality, which is the gift 
of holiness and love. 
Forgiveness must be given by a mind which 
understands that it must overlook all shadows on the holy face of 
Christ, among which sickness should be seen as one. 
Nothing but 
that; the sign of judgment made by brother upon brother, and the 
Son of God upon himself. 
For he has damned his body as his 
prison, S(21) and forgot that it is he who gave this role to it. 


S 3 B 4 What he has done now must God's Son undo. 
But not alone. 

For he has thrown away the prison's key; his holy sinlessness and 
the remembrance of his Father's Love. 
Yet Help is given to him in 
the Voice his Father placed in him. 
The power to heal is now his 
Father's gift, for through His Voice He still can reach His Son, 


165 FIP chances “sin” to “sins” 

166 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change this line to “and so its healing but delays its turning back” 

167 Genesis 2:7 “And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his 
nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living being.” 

168 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “go back” to “return” 

169 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “source” to “cause” 

170 Manuscript spells this “rememberance” 


VI-24 


1816 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


reminding him the body may become his chosen home, but it will 
never be his home in truth. 


C. 
False versus True Healing ' 71 

S 3 C 1 Distinctions therefore must be made between true healing 
and its faulty counterpart. 
The world of opposites is healing's place, 
for what in Heaven could there be to heal? As prayer within the 
world can ask amiss and seeming charity forgive to kill, so healing 
can be false as well as true; a witness to the power of the world or to 
the everlasting Love of God. 


S 3 C 2 False healing merely makes a poor exchange 172 of one 
illusion for a "nicer" one; a dream of sickness for a dream of health. 

This can occur at lower forms of prayer, combining with forgiveness 
kindly meant but not completely understood as yet. 
Only false 
healing can give way to fear, so sickness will be apt 173 to strike 
again. 
False healing can indeed remove a form of pain and sickness. 

But the cause remains, and will not lack effects. 
The cause is still the 
wish to die and overcome the Christ. 
And with this wish is death a 
certainty, for prayer IS answered. 
Yet there is a kind of seeming 
death that has a different source. 
It does not come because of 
hurtful thoughts and raging anger at the universe. 
It merely 
signifies the end has come for usefulness of body functioning. 
And 
so it is discarded as a choice, as one lays 174 by a garment now 
outworn. 


S 3 C 3 This is what death should be; a quiet choice, made joyfully 
and with a sense of peace, because the body has been kindly used to 
help the Son of God along the way he goes to God. 
We thank the 
body, then, for all the service it has given us. 
But we are thankful, 
too, the need is done to walk the world of limits, and to reach the 
Christ in hidden forms and clearly seen at most in lovely flashes. 



171 FIP moves this section heading one paragraph forward. 


172 Manuscript initially has “substitution” which is overstruck, "poor exchange” being typed above. 
The 
latter is better IP. 


173 Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “apt” to “free” 

174 Manuscript has “lies” and handwritten mark-up and FIP correct this to “lays” 


1817 


VI-25 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

Now we can behold Him without blinders, 175 in the light that we 
S(22) have learned 176 to look upon again. 


S 3 C 4 We call it death, but it is liberty. 
It does not come in forms 
that seem to be thrust down in pain upon unwilling flesh, but as a 
gentle welcome to release. 
If there has been true healing, this can be 
the form in which death comes when it is time to rest a while from 
labor gladly done and gladly ended. 
Now we go in peace to freer 
air and gentler climate, where it is not hard to see the gifts we gave 
were saved for us. 
For Christ is clearer now; His vision more 
sustained in us; His Voice, the Word of God, 177 more certainly our 
own. 


S 3 C 5 This gentle passage to a higher prayer, a kind forgiveness of 
the ways of earth, can only be received with thankfulness. 
Yet first 
true healing must have come to bless the mind with loving pardon 
for the sins it dreamed about and laid upon the world. 
Now are its 
dreams dispelled in quiet rest. 
Now its forgiveness comes to heal 
the world and it is ready to depart in peace, 178 the journey over and 
the lessons learned. 


S 3 C 6 This is not death according to the world, for death is cruel in 
its frightened eyes and takes the form of punishment for sin. 
How 
could it be a blessing, then, and how could it be welcome when it 
must be feared? What healing has occurred in such a view of what 
is merely opening the gate to higher prayer and kindly justice done? 
Death is reward and not a punishment. 
But such a viewpoint must 
be fostered by the healing that the world cannot conceive. 
There is 
no partial healing. 
What but shifts illusions has done nothing. 


What is false cannot be partly true. 
If you are healed your healing is 
complete. 
Forgiveness is the only gift you give and would receive. 



173 1 Corinthians 13:12 For now we see in a glass darkly, but then face to face. 
Now I know in part, 
but then I shall know just as I also am known. 


176 Original is “earned” 

177 John. 
1:1-5 “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 

The same was in the beginning with God. 
All things were made through him; and without him was not 
anything made that hath been made. 
In him was life; and the life was the light of men. 
And the light 
shineth in the darkness; and the darkness apprehended it not. 


178 Luke. 
2:29 “Lord, now You are letting Your servant depart in peace, According to Your word;” 


VI-26 


1818 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


S 3 C 7 False healing rests upon the body's cure, leaving the cause 
of illness still unchanged, ready to strike again until it brings a cruel 
death in seeming victory. 
It can be held at bay a little while, and 
there can be brief respite as it waits to take its vengeance on the Son 
of God. 
Yet it cannot be overcome until all faith in it has been laid 
by, and placed upon God's S(23) substitute for evil dreams; a world 
in which there is no veil of sin to keep it dark and comfortless. 
At 
last the gate of Heaven opens and God's Son is free to enter in the 
home that stands ready to welcome him, and was prepared before 
time was and still but 179 waits for him. 


D, Separation versus Union 

S 3 D 1 False healing heals the body in a part, but never as a whole. 

Its separate goals become quite clear in this, for it has not removed 
the curse of sin that lies on it. 
Therefore it still deceives. 
Nor is it 
made by one who understands the other is exactly like himself, for it 
is this that makes true healing possible. 
When false, there is some 
power that another has, not equally bestowed on both as one. 
Here 
is the separation shown. 
And here the meaning of true healing has 
been lost, and idols have arisen to obscure the unity that is the Son 
of God. 
S(24) 

S 3 D 2 Healing-to-separate may seem to be a strange idea. 
Yet 180 it 
can be said of any form of healing that is based on inequality of any 
kind. 
These forms may heal the body, and indeed are generally 
limited to this. 
Someone knows better, has been better trained, or is 
perhaps more talented and wise. 
Therefore, he can give healing to 
the one who stands beneath him in his patronage. 
The healing of 
the body can be done by this because, in dreams, equality cannot be 
permanent. 
The shifts and change are what the dream is made of. 


To be healed appears to be to find a wiser one who, by his arts and 
learning, will succeed. 



179 Typewritten alternative to “but” is “must” 

180 FIP adds “And” before “Yet” 


1819 


VI-27 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

S 3 D 3 Someone knows better; this the magic phrase by which the 
body seems to be the aim of healing as the world conceives of it. 

And to this wiser one another goes to profit by his learning and his 
skill; to find in him the remedy for pain. 
How can that be? True 
healing cannot come from inequality assumed and then accepted as 
the truth, and used to help restore the wounded and to calm the 
mind that suffers from the agony of doubt. 


S 3 D 4 Is there a role for healing, then, that one can use to offer 
help for someone else? In arrogance the answer must be "no." 

Yet 181 in humility there is indeed a place for helpers. 
It is like the 
role that helps in prayer, and lets forgiveness be what it is meant to 
be. 
You do not make yourself the bearer of the special gift that 
brings the healing. 
You but recognize your oneness with the one 
who calls for help. 
For in this oneness is his separate sense 
dispelled, and it was this that made him sick. 
There is no point in 
giving remedy apart from where the source of sickness is, for never 
thus can it be truly healed. 


S 3 D 5 Healers there are, for they are Sons of God who recognize 
their Source, and understand that all their Source creates is one with 
them. 
This is the remedy that brings relief which cannot fail. 
It will 
remain to bless for all eternity. 
It heals no part, but wholly and 
forever. 
Now the cause of every malady has been revealed exactly 
as it is. 
And in that place is written now the holy Word of S(25) 
God. 
Sickness and separation must be healed by love and union. 

Nothing else can heal as God established healing. 
Without Him 
there is no healing, for there is no love. 


S 3 D 6 God's Voice alone can tell you how to heal. 
Listen, and you 
will never fail to bring His kindly remedy to those He sends to you, 
to let Him heal them, and to bless all those who serve with Him in 
healing's name. 
The body's healing will occur because its cause has 
gone. 
And now without a cause, it cannot come again in different 
form. 
Nor will death any more be feared because it has been 


FIP changes “Yet” to “But” 


VI-28 


1820 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


understood. 
There is no fear in one who has been truly healed, for 
love has entered now where idols used to stand, and fear has given 
way at last to God. 
182 

E. 
The Holiness of Healing 

S 3 E 1 How holy are the healed! For in their sight their brothers 
share their healing and their love. 
Bringers of peace - the Holy 
Spirit's voice, 183 through whom He speaks for God, Whose Voice He 
is - such are God's healers. 
They but speak for Him and never for 
themselves. 
They have no gifts but those they have from God. 
And 
these they share because they know that this is what He wills. 
They 
are not special. 
They are holy. 
They have chosen holiness, and 
given up all separate dreams of special attributes through which 
they can bestow unequal gifts on those less fortunate. 
Their healing 
has restored their wholeness so they can forgive, and join the song 
of prayer in which the healed sing of their union and their thanks to 
God. 


S 3 E 2 As witness to forgiveness, aid to prayer, and the effect of 
mercy truly taught, healing is blessing. 
And the world responds in 
quickened chorus through the voice of prayer. 
Forgiveness shines 
its merciful reprieve upon each blade of grass and feathered wing 
and all the living things upon the earth. 
Fear has no haven here, for 
love has come in all its holy oneness. 
Time remains only to let the 
last embrace of prayer rest on the earth an instant, as the world is 
shined away. 
This instant is the goal of all true healers, whom the 
Christ has taught to see His likeness and to teach like Him. 
184 
S 3 E 3 Think what it means to help the Christ to heal! Can anything 
be holier S(26) than this? God thanks His healers, for He knows the 
Cause of healing is Himself, His Love, His Son, restored as His 


182 1 John 4:18 “There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear involves torment. 

But he who fears has not been made perfect in love.” 

183 Manuscript has this in lower case. 


184 Genesis 1:26 “And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have 
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over the cattle, and over all the 
earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. 
And God created man in his own 
image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.” 


1821 


VI-29 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

completion and returned to share with Him creation's holy joy. 
Do 
not ask partial healing, nor accept an idol for remembrance 185 of 
Him Whose Love has never changed and never will. 
You are as 
dear to Him as is the whole of His creation, for it is 186 in you as His 
eternal gift. 
What need have you for shifting dreams within a sorry 
world? Do not forget the gratitude of God. 
Do not forget the holy 
grace of prayer. 
Do not forget forgiveness of God's Son. 


S 3 E 4 You first forgive, then pray, and you are healed. 
Your 
prayer has risen up and called to God, Who hears and answers. 
You 
have understood that you forgive yourself and pray for you 187 and 188 
in this understanding you are healed. 
In prayer you have united 
with your Source, and understood that you have never left. 
This 
level cannot be attained until there is no hatred in your heart, and 
no desire to attack the Son of God. 
Never forget this; it is you who 
are God's Son, and as you choose to be to him so are you to yourself, 
and God to you. 
189 

S 3 E 5 Nor will your judgment fail to reach to God, for you will 
give the role to Him you see in His creation. 
Thus have you become 
"creator" 190 in His place, and He becomes 191 no longer Cause but 
only an effect. 
Now healing is impossible, for on Him lies the 
blame 192 for your deception and your guilt. 
He Who is Love is 
now 193 the source of fear, and 194 only fear can now be justified. 

Vengeance is His. 
195 His great destroyer, death. 
And sickness, 
suffering and grievous loss become the lot of everyone on earth. 



183 Manuscript has “rememberance” 

186 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “is” with “lies” 

187 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “pray for you” with “pray but for yourself.” 

188 FIP starts a new sentence here. 


189 Matthew 25:40 “And the King will answer and say to them, ‘Assuredly, I say to you, inasmuch as 
you did it to one of the least of these My brethren, you did it to Me.'” 

190 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “Thus have you become” with “Do not choose amiss or you 
will think that it is you who are” 

191 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “becomes” with “is then” 

197 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “on Him lies the blame” with “He is blamed” 

193 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “is now” with “becomes” 

194 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “and” with “for” 

195 Romans 12:19 “Beloved, do not avenge yourselves, but rather give place to wrath; for it is written, 
"Vengeance is Mine, I will repay," says the Lord.” 


VI-30 


1822 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 


which He abandoned to the devil's care, swearing He will deliver it 
no more. 


S 3 E 6 Come unto Me, My children, once again, without such 
twisted thoughts upon your heart. 
196 You still are holy with the 
Holiness which fathered you in perfect sinlessness, and still 
surrounds you in 197 the arms of peace. 
Dream now of healing. 
Then 
arise and lay all dreaming down forever. 
You are he your S(27) 
Father loves, who never left his home, nor wandered in a savage 
world with feet that bleed, and with a heavy heart made hard 
against the Love that is the truth in you. 
Give all your dreams to 
Christ and let Him be your Guide to healing, leading you in prayer 
beyond the sorry reaches of the world. 


S 3 E 7 He comes for Me and speaks My Word to you. 
I would 
recall My weary Son to Me from dreams of malice to the sweet 
embrace of everlasting Love and perfect peace. 
My arms 198 are open 
to the Son I love, who does not understand that he is healed, and 
that his prayer has 199 never ceased to sing his joyful thanks in unison 
with all creation, in the holiness of God. 
200 Be still an instant. 
201 
Underneath the sounds of harsh and bitter striving and defeat there 
is a Voice that speaks to you of Me. 
Hear this an instant and you 
will be healed. 
Hear this an instant and you have been saved. 


S 3 E 8 Help Me to wake My children from the dream of retribution 
and a little life beset with fear, that ends so soon it might as well 
have never been. 
Let Me instead remind you of eternity, in which 
your joy grows greater as your love extends along with Mine 
beyond infinity, where time and distance have no meaning. 
While 
you wait in sorrow Heaven's melody is incomplete, because your 


196 Manuscript has “heart” singular, FIP changes this to plural “hearts” 

197 FIP replaces “in” with “with” 

1,8 FIP capitalizes “Arms” 

199 FIP changes this to “prayers have” 

200 FIP changes “God” to “Love” 

201 Psalm 46:10 “Be still, and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth!” 


1823 


VI-31 



Volume VI Song of Prayer 

song is part of the eternal harmony of love. 
Without you is creation 
incomplete. 
202 Return to Me Who never left His 203 Son. 


S 3 E 9 Listen, My child. 
Your Father calls to you. 
Do not refuse to 
hear the call of 204 Love. 
Do not deny to Christ what is His Own. 

Heaven is here and Heaven is your home. 
Creation leans across the 
bars of time to lift the heavy burden from the world. 
Lift up your 
hearts to greet its advent. 
See the shadows fade away in gentleness; 
the thorns fall softly from the bleeding brow of him who is the holy 
Son of God. 
205 How lovely are you. 
Child of Holiness! How like to 
Me! How lovingly I hold you in My heart and in My arms. 
How 
dear is every gift that you have given Me, 206 who healed My Son and 
took him from the cross. 


S 3 E 10 Arise and let My thanks be given you. 
And with My 
gratitude will come the gift first of forgiveness, then eternal peace. 


So now return your holy S(28) voice to Me. 
The song of prayer is 
silent without you. 
The universe is waiting your release because it 
is its own. 
Be kind to it and to yourself, and then be kind to Me. 
I 
ask but this; that you be comforted and live no more in terror and in 
pain. 
Do not abandon Love. 
Remember this; whatever you may 
think about yourself, whatever you may think about the world, your 
Father needs you and will call 207 to you until you come to Him in 
peace at last. 



202 Handwritten mark-up and FIP replace “incomplete” with “unfulfilled” 

203 FIP changes “His” to “My” 

204 FIP has “for” instead of “of’ 

J; Matthew 27:29 “When they had twisted a crown of thorns, they put it on His head, and a reed in His 
right hand. 
And they bowed the knee before Him and mocked Him, saying, ‘Hail, King of the Jews!’” 
20< ’ Handwritten mark-up and FIP change “that you have given Me” to “to Me that you have made,” 

207 Matthew 22:14 “For many are called, but few chosen.” 


VI-32 


1824 



Urtext Volume VII: Gifts of God 


1825 


"\ 


OPY 


PROOF 


1826 

PROOF COPY 


Urtext Volume VII - Gifts of God 


Table of Contents 


1. 
The Dream of Fear. 
1 

2. 
The Two Gifts.6 

3. 
The Ending of the Dream .9 

4. 
Our Gift to God.14 

5. 
The Father's Love.19 


1827 

PROOF COPY 


VH-iii 







VH-iv 


1828 

PROOF COPY 


Volume VII Gifts of God 


Urtext Volume VII - Gifts of God 

1 . 
The Dream of Fear 

G 1 A 1. 
Fear 1 is the emotion of the world. 
2 It has but one. 
3 Its 
forms are many - call them what you will - but it is one in content. 

Never far, even in form, from what its purpose is, never with power 
to escape its cause, and never but a counterfeit of peace, 4 it rests un¬ 
certainly upon a bed of lies. 
Here it was born and sheltered by its 
seeming comfort. 
Here it remains 5 where it was born, and where its 
end will come. 
For here is nothingness, where neither birth nor 
death is real, nor any form in the misshapen mind that spawned it 6 
has any meaning in the Mind of God. 


G 1 A 2. 
If you were certain - wholly sure and with consistent grasp 
of what the world can give - fear would be laid aside as easily as joy 
and peace unite on love's behalf. 
But first there must be certainty 
that there can be no love where fear exists, and that the world will 
never give a gift that 7 is not made of fear, concealed perhaps, but 
which is 8 surely present somewhere in the gift. 
Accept it not, and 
you will understand a gift far greater has been given you. 


G 1 A 3. 
Let not the world deceive you. 
It was made to be decep¬ 
tion. 
Yet its snares can be so easily escaped a little child can walk 
through safely, and without a care that would arrest its progress. 

Dreams are dreams, and every one is equally untrue. 
This is the 
only lesson to be learned. 
Yet will fear linger until every one is rec- 


1 February 8, 1978 

2 The Urtext manuscript has the word “one" handwritten in to make the sentence “Fear is the one emo- 
tion of the world.” 

3 This sentence is crossed out. 


4 The Urtext manuscript has “peace” crossed out and “joy” handwritten in. 


5 Handwritten mark-up suggests “here it will remain” in place of “here it remains.” 

6 Handwritten mark-up suggests “spawned its seeming life” in place of “spawned it” 

7 Handwritten mark-up suggests “which” in place of “that.” 

8 The words “which is” are handwritten in between the lines. 



1829 


VII-1 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


ognized as nothingness, and seen exactly as it is and nothing more. 

There is no person, thing, or circumstance that you can value as 
your own without the "gift" of fear arising in your heart. 
For you 
have seen them all as they are not, and love for them has fled as if 
from you. 
And you will think that God has ceased to care for you 
who have betrayed the Son He loves, and chosen fear and guilt to be 
their friends. 
9 

G 1 A 4. 
Does God deceive or does the world? For it is sure that 
one must lie. 
There is no point at which their thoughts agree, their 
gifts unite in kind or purpose. 
What you take from one the other 
will obscure. 
10 There is no hope of compromise G(2) in this. 
Nor 
can there be a shifting of the mind between the two without the fear 
that every dream must bring. 
How fearful it must be to see yourself 
as maker of reality and truth, the lord of * 11 destiny and time's do¬ 
main, and arbiter appointed for the world. 


G 1 A 5. 
Dreams never change. 
Remember only this, but do not let 
it slip away at times and let yourself give way to fear again. 
Deny 
the dream but do not fail the truth, for 12 what is true alone 13 will 
never fail. 
All else deceives, 14 all else will terrify, and even when it 
seems to please the most it brings with it a heavy cost of pain. 
Be 
free of suffering now. 
There is no cost for any gift that comes to you 
from God. 
His way is certain, for His gifts remain forever as He 
gave them. 
Do not think that fear can enter where His gifts abide. 

But do not think His gifts can be received where fear has entered 15 
and has touched your sight with gross distortions that the world 
thinks real. 



9 It would appear that “their” in “their friends” is first crossed out and replaces with “your.” Then the 
whole phrase is crossed out and “to be your friends” becomes “in place of him.” 

10 Luke 16:13 No servant can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or 
else he will hold to one, and despise the other. 
Ye cannot serve God and mammon. 


11 the word “ruler” is typed in brackets between “lord” and “of’ and then crossed out. 


12 Handwritten mark-up suggests changing "for what is true" to "for only what is true" between the lines 

13 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “alone” apparently in conjunction with adding “only” as above. 


14 Handwritten mark-up puts a sentence break here. 


15 Handwritten mark-up inserts a comma here 


VII-2 


1830 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


G 1 A 6. 
There are no scraps of dreams. 
Each one contains the 
whole of fear, the opposite of love, (in all its ways), 16 the hell that 
hides the memory of God, the crucifixion of His holy Son. 
There¬ 
fore, be vigilant against them all, for in their single purpose they are 
one, and hell is total. 
It can seem to be 17 forever for this lesson to be 
learned, and yet it need not be. 
I came to speak in time of timeless¬ 
ness. 
Have you not learned the pain of dreaming yet? There is no 
need to hug it to your heart, and to forget the dreadful cost of sal¬ 
vaging despair and building up deceptions once again. 


G 1 A 7. 
The tiniest of dreams, the smallest wish for values of the 
world is large enough to stand between you and the sweet release 
that God would offer you. 
He cannot choose to change His Son, nor 
make your mind accept the perfect freedom He has given you. 
Yet 
it is certain you will turn to Him and suddenly remember. 
But be 
sure of this and do not let it slip away: 18 

What God has joined is one. 
And one as well is everything that 
fear has made to be the great deceiver and the substitute for 
God's G(3) creation. 
You can choose but one, and which you 
choose is total. 
Everything the world can offer promises some 
joy that it will never give. 
And everything that God has prom¬ 
ised you will never fail in anything. 
No need will be unmet, no 
hurt unhealed, no sorrow kept unchanged, no darkness undis¬ 
pelled. 
The smallest pain will vanish suddenly before His 
gifts. 
19 

G 1 A 8. 
An unremembered world will leave no trace behind its go¬ 
ing, when God's gifts have been accepted as the only thing 20 you 


16 the bracketed words “in all its ways” are crossed out. 


17 the word “be” is crossed out and “take” is handwritten in between the lines. 


18 Handwritten mark-up indicates “no indent” here and adjusts paragraph breaks in this segment 

19 Handwritten mark-up indicates “no indent” and makes this all a continuous paragraph. 


Isaiah 25:8 He hath swallowed up death for ever; and the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from off all 
faces; and the reproach of his people shall he take away from off all the earth: for the LORD hath spo¬ 
ken it. 


20 Handwritten mark-up makes “thing” into “things” 


1831 


VII-3 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


want. 
21 "Choose once again" 22 is still your only hope. 
Darkness can¬ 
not conceal the gifts of God unless you want it so. 
In peace I come, 
and urge you now to make an end to time and step into eternity 
with me. 
There will not be a change that eyes can see, nor will you 
disappear from things of time. 
But you will hold my hand as you 
return because we come together. 
Now the hosts of Heaven come 
with us, to sweep away all vestiges of dreams and every thought 
that rests on nothingness. 


G 1 A 9. 
How dear are you to God, Who asks but that you walk 
with me and bring His light into a sickened world which fear has 
drained of love and life and hope. 
23 Surely you will not fail to hear 
my call, 24 for I have never failed to hear your cries of pain and 
grief, 25 and I have come to save and to redeem the world at last from 
fear. 
It never was, nor is, nor yet will be what you imagine. 
Let me 
see for you, and judge for you what you would look upon. 
When 
you have seen with me but once, you would no longer value any 
fearful thing at cost of glory and the peace of God. 


G 1 A 10. 
This is my offering: A quiet world, with gentle ordering 
and kindly thoughts, alive with hope and radiant in joy, without the 


21 Handwritten mark-up suggests paragraph break at this point. 


22 T 31H 1 Temptation has ONE lesson it would teach, in ALL its forms, WHEREVER it occurs. 
It 
would persuade the holy Son of God he is a body, bom in what must die, unable to escape its frailty, 
and bound by what it orders him to feel. 
It sets the limits on what he can do; its power is the only 
strength he has; his grasp cannot exceed its tiny reach. 
Would you BE this, if Christ appeared to you in 
all His glory, asking you but this, “Choose once again if you would take your place among the Saviors 
of the world, or would remain in hell, and hold your brothers there.” For He HAS come, and He IS 
asking this. 


T 31H 6 You ARE as God created you, and so is every living thing you look upon, REGARDLESS of 
the images you see. 
What you behold as sickness and as pain, as weakness and as suffering and loss, is 
but temptation to perceive YOURSELF defenseless and in hell. 
Yield NOT to this, and you will see 
ALL pain in EVERY form WHEREVER it occurs but disappear as mists before the sun. 
A miracle has 
come to heal God’s Son, and close the door upon his dreams of weakness, opening the way to his salva¬ 
tion and release. 
Choose once again what you would have him be, remembering that every choice you 
make establishes your own identity as you will see it, and believe it IS. 


23 Handwritten mark-up suggests moving the paragraph break here. 


24 As originally typed there is a full sentence break here, which handwritten mark-up changes to a 
comma. 
This appears to be a correction since a full stop is not required here. 


25 typed in brackets and then crossed out is “( agony )/' Also a sentence break is originally typed 
here, changed by handwritten mark-up to a comma. 



VII-4 


1832 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


smallest bitterness of fear upon its loveliness. 
Accept this now, for I 
have waited long to give this gift to you. 
I offer it in place of fear 
and all the "gifts" of fear. 
26 Can you choose otherwise, when all the 
world is standing breathless, waiting on your choice? Come now to 
me and we will go to God. 
There is no way that we can go alone. 

But when we come together there can be no way in which the Word 
of God can fail. 
For His the Word that makes us one in Him, and 
mine the Voice that speaks this Word to you. 
G(4) 27 


26 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “of fear” and inserts “that fear has given you.” 

27 2/9/78 


1833 

PROOF COPY 


VII-5 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


2 . 
The Two Gifts 

G 2 A 1. 
How 28 can you be delivered from all gifts the world has 
offered you? How can you change these little, cruel offerings for 
those that Heaven gives and God would have you keep? Open your 
hands, and give all things to me that you have held against your ho¬ 
liness and kept as slander on the Son of God. 
Practice with every 
one you recognize as what it is. 
Give me these worthless things the 
instant that you see them through my eyes 29 and understand their 
cost. 
Then give away these bitter dreams as you perceive them now 
to be but that, and nothing more than that. 


G 2 A 2. 
I take them from you gladly, laying them beside the gifts of 
God that He has placed upon the altar to His Son. 
And these I give 
to you to take the place of those you gave away 30 in mercy on yourself. 

These are the gifts I ask, and only these. 
For as you lay them by you 
reach to me, and I can come as savior then to you. 
The gifts of God 
are in my hands, to give to anyone who would exchange the world 
for Heaven. 
31 You need only call my Name, 32 and ask me to accept 
the gift of pain from willing hands that would be laid in mine, 33 with 


28 2/9/78 (February 9, 1978) 

29 Typed in brackets and then crossed out is “( sight )." 

30 The words “gave away” are crossed out and “give to me" is handwritten in. 


1 T 11 D 9. 
Long ago we said that God so loved the world that He gave it to His only-begotten Son. 

(that whosoever believeth on him should never see death). 
God DOES love the real world, and those 
who perceive its reality cannot see the world of death. 
For death is not of the real world, in which eve¬ 
rything is eternal. 
God gave you the real world in exchange for the one you made, out of your split 
mind, and which IS the symbol of death. 
For if you could REALLY separate yourselves from the Mind 
of God, you WOULD die. 
And the world you perceive IS a world of separation. 


T 111 9. 
The real world was given you by God, in loving exchange for the world YOU made, and 
which you see. 
But take it from the hand of Christ, and look upon it. 
Its reality will make everything 
else invisible, for beholding it is TOTAL perception. 
And as you look upon it, you will remember that it 
was always so. 
Nothingness will become invisible, for you will at last have seen truly. 
Redeemed per¬ 
ception is easily translated into knowledge, for ONLY perception is capable of error. 
And perception 
has never been. 
Being corrected, it gives place to knowledge, which is forever the ONLY reality. 
The 
Atonement is but the way back to what was never lost. 
Your Father could not cease to love His Son. 


32 typed with a capital “N” that is struck through indicating lower case 

33 The theme of holding hands is frequently used in the Text as a metaphor for loving relationship be¬ 
tween humans, and between man and God. 
In particular Jesus and the Holy Spirit are characterized as 
leading us by the hand. 
Here are a few examples: 


VII-6 


1834 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


thorns laid down and nails long thrown away as one by one the 
sorry gifts of earth are joyously relinquished. 
In my hands is every¬ 
thing you want and need and hoped to find among the shabby toys 
of earth. 
I take them all from you and they are gone. 
And shining 
in the place where once they stood there is a gateway to another 
world through which we enter in the Name of God. 


G 2 A 3. 
Father, we thank You for these gifts that we have found 
together. 
Here we are redeemed. 
For it is here we joined, and from 
this place of holy joining we will come to You because we recognize 
the gifts You gave and would have nothing else. 
Each hand that 
finds its way to mine will take 34 Your gifts from me, and as we look 


T 8 E 23 I DO go before you, because I AM beyond the ego. 
Reach therefore for my hand because you 
WANT to transcend the ego. 
My will, will NEVER be wanting, and if you want to share it YOU WILL. 

I give it willingly and gladly, because I need YOU as much as you need ME. 


T 17 F 11. 
In your newness, remember that you have started again, TOGETHER. 
And take 
each other's hand, to walk together along a road far more familiar than you now believe. 
Is it 
not certain, that you will remember a goal unchanged throughout eternity? For you have 
chosen but the goal of God, from which your true intent was NEVER absent. 
Throughout the 
Sonship is the song of freedom heard, in joyous echo of your choice. 
You have joined with 
many, in the holy instant, and THEY have joined with you. 
Think not your choice will leave 
YOU comfortless. 
For God Himself has blessed your special relationship. 
JOIN in His bless¬ 
ing, and withhold not yours upon it. 
For all it needs now IS your blessing, that you may see 
that in it rests salvation. 


T 18 D 5. 
You who hold each other's hand also hold mine, for when you joined each other you 
were not alone. 
Do you believe that I would leave you in the darkness you agreed to leave 
with ME? In your relationship is this world's light. 
And fear MUST disappear before you 
now. 
Be tempted not to snatch away the gift of faith you offered to each other. 
You will suc¬ 
ceed only in frightening yourselves. 
The gift is given forever, for God Himself received it. 
You 
CANNOT take it back. 
You have accepted God. 
The holiness of your relationship is estab¬ 
lished in Heaven. 
You do not understand what you accepted, but remember that your under¬ 
standing is not necessary. 
All that was necessary was merely the WISH to understand. 
That 
wish was the desire to be holy. 
The will of God is granted you. 
For you desire the only thing 
you ever had, or ever were. 


T 24 C 7 [...] Here stands your brother with the key to Heaven in his hand, held out to you. 


Let not the dream of specialness remain between you. 
What is one IS joined in truth. 


T 31 H 10 Salvation's song will echo through the world with every choice they make. 
For we 
are one in purpose, and the end of hell is near. 
In joyous welcome is my hand outstretched to 
every brother who would join with me in reaching past temptation, and who looks with fixed 
determination toward the light that shines beyond in perfect constancy. 


34 several words typed and crossed out; they may be “the gifts You gave” 


1835 


VII-7 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


together on the place whereon I laid your worthless gifts for you, we 
will see nothing but the gifts of God reflected in the shining round 
our heads. 
35 Holy are we who know our holiness, for it is You Who 
shine Your light on us, and we are thankful, in our Father's G(5) 
Name , 36 that You have not forgotten. 
What we thought we made of 
You has merely disappeared, and with its going are the images we 
made of Your creation gone as well. 
And it is finished. 
37 Now into 
Your Hands we give again the spirit 38 of Your Son who seemed to 
lose his way a little while but never left the safety of Your Love. 
The 
gifts of fear, the dream of death, are done. 
39 And we give thanks. 

And we give thanks. 
Amen. 
G(6) 40 


35 Handwritten mark-up suggests paragraph break here. 


Acts 26:13 at midday, O king, I saw on the way a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, 
shining round about me and them that journeyed with me. 


36 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “our Father’s Name” and then is typed “Your ancient Name." 

37 John 19:30 “When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and he bowed his 
head, and gave up his spirit.” 

38 Handwritten mark-up revises this phrase to “For we now commend into Your Hands the spirit” after, 
apparently first changing “give again” to “offer up” then crossing that out. 


Psalm 31:5 Into thine hand I commend my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, O LORD, thou God of truth. 

Luke 23:46 And Jesus, crying with a loud voice, said, “Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit:” 
and having said this, he gave up the ghost. 


39 This sentence is typed between the lines and handwritten mark-up points it to this location. 


40 February 11, 1978 


VII-8 


1836 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


3 . 
The Ending of the Dream 

G 3 A 1. 
Illusions 41 are made as substitutes for truth, for which no 
substitutes are possible. 
Creator separate from creation was the first 
illusion, where all gifts of fear were born. 
For now creation could 
not be like its Creator, Who could never leave what He Himself cre¬ 
ated part of Him. 
Now must there be a substitute for love, which 
cannot have an opposite in truth and, being all, can have no substi¬ 
tute. 
42 So fear was made, and with it came the need for gifts to lend 
the substance to the 43 dream in which there is no substance. 
Now 
the dream seems to have value, for its offerings appear as hope and 
strength and even love, if only for an instant. 
They content the 
frightened dreamer for a little while, and let him not remember the 
first dream which gifts of fear but offer him again. 
44 

G 3 A 2. 
The seeming solace of illusions' gifts are now his armor, 
and the sword he holds to save himself from waking. 
For before he 
could awaken, he would first be forced to call to mind the first 
dream once again. 
45 It is not God Who asks a price of him, but hav¬ 
ing drawn a veil across the truth, he now must let the veil be drawn 
away so that its lack of substance can be seen. 
No one would hesi¬ 
tate to leave 46 a dream of shock and terror, merciless decay and sick¬ 
ening contortions, 47 with despair always in sight and death not far 
behind, if he believed that it was 48 but a dream. 
Yet if he thinks that 
he must first go through a greater terror still, he must see hope in 
what will now appear the "better" dream. 



41 February 11, 1978 

’ Handwritten mark-up appears to change full stop to an em dash. 


43 the word “the” is crossed out and “a” handwritten in. 


44 Handwritten mark-up indicates removal of paragraph break. 


45 Handwritten mark-up suggests paragraph break here. 


46 the word “let” is crossed out and “leave” handwritten in. 
Since “let” makes little sense here, we’re 
calling this a correction. 


47 Typed and then crossed out is “( convulsions, corruptions )." 

48 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “was” and inserts “ were ” 


1837 


VII-9 





Volume VII Gifts of God 


G 3 A 3. 
And now he seeks within his dream to find what gifts it 
may contain. 
What can you get within its shadows? Who can save 
you now by giving you the love you threw away? What can you 
learn to do to make yourself a master over others? What is there 
that is your special gift within the dream? Find these and do not 
waken from the dream, for it can give you what you think you lack. 

And 49 if you waken all its gifts will go, your armor and your sword 
will disappear, and vultures, always circling overhead, will claim 
you as their lawful prey at last. 
G(7) 

G 3 A 4. 
Oh children of the Father you forgot, you have not put 
your idols in His place, nor made Flim give the gifts of fear you 
made. 
Let me be Savior from illusions. 
Truth may be concealed 
from you by evil dreams, but it is only from the dreams that you 
have need of 50 saving. 
Truth is still untouched by your deceptions. 

But 51 you cannot go past that first dream without a Savior's 52 hand 
in yours. 
Each gift of fear would hold you back unless you let me 
lift it from your mind by showing you that it is but a dream within a 
larger dream of hopelessness in which there is no hope. 
Take not its 
gifts, for they condemn you to a lasting hell which will endure when 
all the seeming joy the gifts appeared to give has 53 passed away. 


G 3 A 5. 
Do not be tempted. 
Do not fall away into the shadows, 
and a deeper sleep in which the waking seems to be the dream. 


Help me give you salvation. 
Let us share the strength of Christ, and 
look upon the dream in which illusions started, and which serves 54 
to keep their birthplace secret and apart from the illumination of the 
truth. 
Come unto me. 
There is no need to dream of an escape from 


49 The word "And” is crossed out and “But” handwritten in. 


50 The manuscript has “from” but it appears to be a typo, since “of’ is grammatically much better. 


51 Handwritten mark-up replaces the period with a comma, and “But” with “yet.” 

52 Initially typed with lower case, the capital “S” is handwritten in. 


53 The manuscript has "have” but this leads to an agreement in number problem. 
It must be “has” or the 
word “joy” must be “joys.” 

34 the manuscript has “serve” but this leads to an agreement in number problem. 
The subject is “dream” 
(singular) and its verb is “serve” (plural). 
It must be “dream serves” or “dreams serve” for correct 
grammar. 



VII-10 


1838 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


dreaming. 
It will fail. 
For if the dream were real, escape would be 
impossible, and there would be no hope except illusions. 
Do not 
yield to this. 
It is not so. 
For I am not a dream that comes in mock¬ 
ery. 
Salvation needs your help as well as mine. 
Do not forget you 
do not answer for yourself alone. 


G 3 A 6. 
My call to you is that you offer help from all the dreams 
the holy Son of God imagines, from the time that first of dreams was 
given false reality until all dreaming ends forever. 
Could a gift be 
holier than this? And could the need within a world of dreams be 
more acute or more compelling? Give me help in this, and not one 
gift the world may seek to give, or 55 one illusion held against the 
truth, can bind you longer. 
Time can have no sway upon you, nor 
can any laws of earth have power over you. 
Your hands 56 will heal, 
and give the gifts that you accept of me. 


G 3 A 7. 
Flow joyful and how holy is our way when death has no 
dominion, and the G(8) dream of separation, agony and loss has 
been dispelled forever. 
Do not think that anything the gifts of fear 
hold out is worth an instant's hesitation, when the gate of Heaven 
stands before you and the Christ of God is waiting your return. 
Be 
still and hear Him, for His call to you could not be more insistent 
nor more dear, for it is but the call of Love Itself, Which 57 will not 
cease to speak of God to you. 
You have forgot, 58 but 59 He is faithful 
still, because He is so like His Father He remembers Him forever in 
His Love. 
And He cannot forget creation is inseparable from Crea¬ 
tor, so He understands that you are part of God and of the Son cre¬ 
ated like Himself. 



55 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “or” and writes in “nor.” 

56 T 1 A 1 “You will see miracles through your hands through Me.” 

37 Handwritten mark-up strikes the capitals from two words making it “Love itself, which.” 

58 Perhaps this should be “forgotten.” 

59 Handwritten mark-up replaces the comma with a period and starts a new sentence “But He is ...” 


1839 


VII-11 




Volume VII Gifts of God 


G 3 A 8. 
How dear are you to Him, a part in which is every gift of 
God forever laid, without whom is Christ incomplete. 
Who 60 is com¬ 
pletion of His Father. 
Can a dream destroy a truth so holy and so 
pure that it encompasses all truth, and leaves nothing beyond It¬ 
self? 61 Can you betray a love so perfect that its gifts become Itself 62 
in oneness, and this single gift is all there is to give and to receive? 
Oh come and let creation be again all that it always was and still will 
be forever and forever. 
63 Let the dream of time be given its ap¬ 
pointed end, 64 and let God's Son have mercy on himself. 


G 3 A 9. 
There is a silence covering the world that was an ancient 
dream so long ago no one remembers now. 
Its time is done, and in 
the little space it seemed to have 65 is nothingness. 
The dream has 
gone, and all its dreams of gifts have disappeared as well. 
Tire first 
dream has been seen and understood for merely an illusion of the 
fear on which the world was based. 
Behind 66 the dream, reaching to 
everything, embracing all, creation and Creator still remain in per¬ 
fect harmony and perfect love. 
67 

G 3 A 10. 
This is beyond the gate at which we stand. 
And shall we 
stay to wait upon a dream? Your holiness is mine, and mine is His . 
68 
Here is His gift, complete and undefiled. 
It is Himself He gives, and 


60 This sentence is massively marked up with a footnote offering the following modified reading: “How 
dear are you, a part of Christ in Whom is every gift of God forever laid, without which is He incom¬ 
plete, Who...” 

61 Handwritten mark-up strikes the capital. 


62 Handwritten mark-up strikes the capital. 


63 Psalm 148:6 He hath also established them for ever and ever: he hath made a decree which shall not 
pass away. 


Isaiah 30:8 Now go, write it before them on a tablet, and inscribe it in a book, that it may be for the 
time to come for ever and ever. 


64 T 1 B 13. 
A miracle is a beginning and an ending. 
It thus abolishes time. 
It is always an affirmation 
of re-birth, which seems to go back, but really goes forward. 
It undoes the past in the present, and thus 
releases the future. 


T 1 B 15. 
Each day should be devoted to miracles. 
God created time so that man could use it creatively, 
and convince himself of his own ability to create. 
Time is a teaching device, and a means to an end. 
It 
will cease when it is no longer useful for facilitating learning. 


65 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “have” and the brackets around the originally typed “(own)." 

66 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “Behind” and the brackets around the originally typed “(Beyond).” 

67 Handwritten mark-up shifts paragraph break two sentences later. 


68 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “His” and replaces it with “God’s.” 


VII-12 


1840 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


it is this that is the truth in you. 
G(9) How beautiful are you who 
stand beside me at the gate, and call with me that everyone may 
come and step aside from time. 
Put out your hand to touch eternity 
and disappear into its perfect rest. 
Here is the peace that God in¬ 
tended for the Child 69 He loves. 
Enter with me and let its quietness 
cover the earth forever. 
It is done. 
Father, your Voice has called us 
home at last: gone is the dream. 
Awake, My Child, 70 in love. 
G(10) 


69 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “Child” and the brackets around the originally typed “(Son)." 

70 Handwritten mark-up strikes the capital. 



1841 


VII-13 


PROOF 


COPY 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


4. 
Our Gift to God 

G 4 A 1. 
There 71 is no gift of faith that God does not accept with 
gratitude. 
He loves His Son. 
And as He gives His gifts to him, so is 
He grateful for the gifts His Son gives Him. 
Gratitude is the song of 
Heaven, 72 the single harmony of 73 all creation at one with its Crea¬ 
tor. 
For gratitude is love expressed in joining; the necessary condi¬ 
tion 74 for extension and the prerequisite for peace. 
And who can be 
in conflict and love God? 

G 4 A 2. 
We have discussed the gifts of God to you. 
Now we must 
also speak of those that you can give to Him. 
For it is 75 these that 
render 76 His giving, complete, 77 as it is His to you that make you 
whole. 
Giving is joy and holiness and healing. 
Here is your answer 
to the world, and God's as well. 
For here it is you join with Him, 
His likeness being yours in this alone. 
78 

G 4 A 3. 
How can you give to Him Who has no lack, no need, no 
emptiness, 79 no unlit place which needs a light that you can offer 
Him? He saves your gifts for you. 
He does not know of giving and 
receiving. 
What is love, or comes from love, or offers love a gift, is 
one to Him because it is of Him. 
To Him and from Him are not dif¬ 
ferent to One Who has no opposite. 
For love is all there is and eve¬ 
rything there is. 
A gift to love is given everyone, not lessening the 
giver, nor in truth adding to the receiver. 
More than love there can¬ 
not be. 
But this a gift becomes if it is truly given and received by 
both to both who know that they are one: 


71 March +8 5 (ca.) 1978 

73 Handwritten mark-up strikes “Heaven” and writes in “Heaven’s gift.” 

73 Handwritten mark-up strikes “of’ and writes in “that is sung by.” 

4 Handwritten mark-up changes “condition” to “precondition.” 

7 Handwritten mark-up strikes out “it is.” 

76 Handwritten mark-up strikes out “that render” and writes in “complete.” 

77 Handwritten mark-up strikes out “complete.” 

78 (March 18 1978) 

79 Handwritten mark-up suggests switching the phrases to make it “no emptiness, no need.” 


VII-14 


1842 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


a key to silence and the peace of God, 

a glad acknowledgement of love of Christ, 

a greeting to the Holy Spirit's help, 

an invitation that He enter in 

and lift the Son of God unto Himself. 
80 

G 4 A 4. 
What more would God hold dearer, 81 than this? These are 
His gifts as G(ll) much as they are yours, for in them giver and re¬ 
ceiver join. 
A gift is holy only when there is no sense of 82 all of who 
will gain thereby, and not a shadow of a thought of loss. 
It is not 
easy in the world to know what giving means, and how to give a 
gift that God and all creation will accept as shining outward from a 
thankful heart and inward to the altar of its God. 


G 4 A 5. 
God gives the 83 grace to give as He must give, for He must 
give the only way He knows, and what He knows is everything He 
is. 
Christ gives as He does, being like Himself. 
And nothing stands 
outside the gifts They give, for every gift is all-encompassing and 
lifts the universe into Their arms. 
84 

G 4 A 6. 
Yet what of you 85 who seem to be on earth, and do not un¬ 
derstand what giving is because you have forgotten what love 
means? What gifts are there that you can give to God? My brother, 
there are many calls to you from those who lost their way and need 
your help in finding it again. 
It seems to you that you are helping 
them if you respond to what they ask and what you think they need 
Yet it is always God Who calls to you, and he who 86 asks your help 


811 Handwritten mark-up suggests (no indent) for this segment. 


81 Handwritten mark-up suggests “then,” 

8: Handwritten mark-up strikes “of and writes in “at.” 

83 The words “ gift of are struck out in the original manuscript. 


84 Handwritten mark-up capitalizes “Arms.” 

83 Originally “us” is typed in brackets here and then crossed out. 


88 The words “he who” were capitalized originally and then corrected to lower case in handwritten 
mark-up. 



1843 


VII-15 




Volume VII Gifts of God 


is but yourself. 
Who is the giver and the 87 receiver then? Who asks 
the gift and who is given it? 

G 4 A 7. 
This is the only lesson that the world must teach in giving. 

It is not the one the world was made to teach. 
And yet it is the one 
the Holy Spirit sees in it, and so it is the only one it has. 
Forget the 
other devastating ways the gifts of earth are given and received. 

Forget the cost, the thoughts of loss and gain, the bargaining, the 
counting of the score, the world associates with every gift it gives in 
strict accordance with its laws. 
The money-changers of the market¬ 
place have been your teachers. 
88 Now they need a gift they could 
not give. 
Be savior now to them because you have another Teacher 
now. 
89 

G 4 A 8. 
Count not the cost of giving. 
There is none. 
Your teachers 
have deceived. 
G(12) But do not think that their mistakes were not 
your own as well. 
To all who do not understand the gifts of God 
and Christ are one, be yours the voice that echoes what the Voice for 
God would say: 

"Save Me, My brother, as you save yourself, 

And let Me give to God your gifts for you 

Because My 90 altar waits for them in love, 

And God 91 is asking that We place them there." 

There is no love but God's; no gifts but His. 
We but return his Own 
unto Himself. 
But as we do. 
He comes to call His Son from the far 


87 Handwritten mark-up strikes out “the.” 

88 Matthew 21:12 And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought 
in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of them that sold the 
doves; 

89 Matthew 23:8 “But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your teacher, and all ye are brethren.” 

90 Handwritten mark-up crosses out “My” and strikes the brackets from the originally typed “His.” 

91 Handwritten mark-up strikes out “God” and writes in “He.” 


VII-16 


1844 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


country where he threw away the memory 92 of all his Father's gifts, 
and ask him to return again to Him. 


G 4 A 9. 
Child of Eternal Love, what gift is there your Father wants 
of you except yourself? And what is there that you would rather 
give, for what is there that you would rather have? You have for¬ 
gotten Who you really are. 
What but that memory is dear to you? 
What trifling gifts made out of sickly fear 93 and evil dreams of suf¬ 
fering and death can be the substitute you really want for the re¬ 
membrance of Christ in you? In the far country you were lost in¬ 
deed, but you were not forgotten. 
Hear the call of love to love, by 
love, in love to you, and rise with love beside you to return 94 the gift 
of love that He 95 has given you, and you have given Him in grati¬ 
tude. 


G 4 A 10. 
Do not forget the Source of what you are, and do not 
think He has forgotten you. 
Love does not waver, 96 and does not 
forget the gifts 97 it gives that it would have you keep. 
Return them, 
then, for it is dark indeed in the far country, where God's memory 
has seemed to disappear. 
Yet Christ has come wherever you have 
gone. 
For you are His, and being His you are His Father's too. 
He 
brings with Him the gifts His Father gave, and giving them to you 
He teaches you how to return them in the way He gives. 
Light 
knows no limit; love no lessening. 
Return, My Child, 98 to Me. 
For 


92 The words "the memory" are typed between the lines, apparently the correction of an inad- 
vertent omission. 


93 Handwritten mark-up crosses out originally typed “( sick despair )/ 7 

94 Handwritten mark-up crosses out originally typed “( to God )/' 

95 Handwritten mark-up strikes “He” and writes in “God.” 

96 1 Corinthians 13:4-8 Love suffereth long, and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth not itself, is 
not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not its own, is not provoked, taketh not account 
of evil; rejoiceth not in unrighteousness, but rejoiceth with the truth; beareth all things, believeth all 
things, hopeth all things, endureth all things. 
Love never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they 
shall be done away; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall be 
done away. 
For we know in part, and we prophesy in part: but when that which is perfect is come, that 
which is in part shall be done away. 


97 Handwritten mark-up strikes the capital on “gifts” which leads to an agreement in number problem 
since the word “them” in the next sentence appears to refer back to these “gifts.” 

98 Handwritten mark-up strikes the capital. 



1845 


VII-17 




Volume VII Gifts of God 


Christ is He Who is My Son and you are one with Him. 
You are My 
gift, for you are one with Me." G(13) 


99 John 17:22 “And the glory which thou hast given me I have given unto them; that they may be one, 
even as we are one;” 


VII-18 


1846 

PROOF COPY 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


5. 
The Father's Love 

G 5 A 1. 
There 100 is a secret place in everyone in which God's gifts 
are laid, and his to Him. 
It is not secret to the eyes of Christ Who 
sees it plainly and unceasingly. 
Yet it is hidden to the body's eyes, 
and to those still invested in the world and caring for the petty gifts 
it gives, esteeming them and thinking they are real. 
Illusions' gifts 
will hide the secret place where God is clear as day, and Christ with 
Him. 
Oh let this not be secret to the world so full of sorrow and so 
racked with pain. 
You could relieve its grief and heal its pain, and 
let the peace of God envelop it as does a mother rock a tired child 
until it sighs and slips away to rest. 


G 5 A 2. 
Rest could be yours because of what God is. 
He loves you 
as a mother loves her child; her only one, the only love she has, her 
all-in-all, extension of herself, as much a part of her as breath itself. 

He loves you as a brother loves his own, born of one father, still as 
one in him, and bonded with a seal that cannot break. 
He loves you 
as a lover loves his own; his chosen one, his joy, his very life, the one 
he seeks when she has gone away, and brings him peace again on 
her return. 
He loves you as a father loves his son, without whom 
would his self be incomplete, whose immortality completes his own, 
for in him is the chain of love complete - a golden circle that will 
never end, a song that will be sung throughout all time and after¬ 
wards, and always will remain the deathless sound of loving and of 
love. 


G 5 A 3. 
Oh be at peace, beloved of the Lord! What is your life but 
gratitude to Him Who loves you with an everlasting Love? What is 
your purpose here but to recall into His loving arms 101 the son He 
loves, who has forgotten Who his Father is? What is your only goal, 
your only hope, your only need, the only thing you want, but to al- 


100 April 11, 1978 

101 Handwritten mark-up capitalizes “Anns.” 


1847 


VII-19 



Volume VII Gifts of God 


low the secret place of peace to burst upon the world in all its joy, 
and let the Voice within it speak of Him Whose love shines out and 
in and in between, through all the darkened places to embrace all 
living things within its golden peace? G(14) 102 

G 5 A 4. 
You are My Son, and I do not forget the secret place in 
which I still abide, knowing you will remember. 
Come, My Son, 
open your heart and let Me shine on you, and on the world through 
you. 
You are My light and dwelling-place. 
You speak for Me to 
those who have forgotten. 
Call them now to Me, My Son, remember 
now for all the world. 
I call in love, as you will answer Me, for this 
the only language that we know. 
Remember love, so near you can¬ 
not fail to touch its heart because it beats in you. 
Do not forget. 
Do 
not forget. 
My Child. 
Open the door before the hidden place, and 
let Me blaze upon a world made glad in sudden ecstasy. 
I come, I 
come. 
Behold Me. 
I am here for I am you ; 103 in Christ, for Christ, 

My Own beloved Son, the glory of the infinite, the joy of Heaven 
and the holy peace of earth, returned to Christ and from His hand to 
Me. 
Say now Amen, My Son, for it is done. 
The secret place is open 
now at last. 
Forget all things except My changeless Love. 
Forget all 
things except that I am here. 



102 4 / 11/79 

103 Handwritten mark-up capitalizes “You.” 


VII-20 


1848 



Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


Table of Contents 


1. 
INTRODUCTION.2 

2. 
VERSION HISTORY IN BRIEF.6 

The Many Editions, a Confusing Proliferation.6 

Terminology and Nomenclature.8 

3. 
THE SCRIBAL VERSIONS AND EDITIONS IN DETAIL.13 

The Shorthand Notes.13 

The Thetford Transcript.15 

The Urtext Version.15 

The HLC Version.16 

The Nun’s Version (Foundation for Inner Peace version).17 

4. 
THE SEVEN VOLUMES.19 

5. 
POST-SCRIBAL VERSIONS.20 

The Eclectic Critical Version.20 

Whitmore’s Interpretive “Original Edition”.22 

6. 
DIFFERENT KINDS OF EDITIONS.24 

7. 
PUBLISHER CONTACT INFORMATION.33 


PROO 


1849 


COPY 


Appendix 1-1 


















Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


Family Tree: 5 Scribal Versions, 25 Editions 

by Doug Thompson 

1. 
Introduction 

Most of the currently available editions of A Course in Miracles (listed 
on the next page) are at least honest attempts to produce a reasonably 
accurate copy of a particular Scribal Version, and, except for the facsimile 
and replica editions, all introduce some changes, correcting at least some of 
the most obvious unintentional typos, although several add a number of new 
ones and a few go beyond the “obvious typos” to address some more subtle 
problems such as apparently inadvertent omissions. 


Editions which document editorial “interventions” are generally referred 
to as “ Scholarly Editions ” or “ Critical Editions .” There is no single generic 
term for editions which fail to meet the standard of “scholarly edition” 
although the terms “recreational edition” and “reader’s edition” and “popular 
edition” are sometimes used. 
When dealing with a very inaccurate, sloppy 
and amateurish productions, and there have been some of them, a variety of 
unflattering terms are sometimes used. 


Unfortunately for the reader, very few editions of the Course document 
the changes they introduce and several make statements indicating there are 
far fewer changes present than is actually the case. 


One early English translation of the Bible in the 16 th Century suffered 
from serious proofreading problems. 
In the Ten Commandments, for 
example, the unfortunate wording “Thou shalt commit adultery” appeared. 
It 
ended up being called the “ Wicked Edition .” 

The “editions” listed in the “ Family Tree Chart ” then are those which at 
least attempt to reproduce one of the original Scribal Versions with 
alterations limited to dealing with actual errors. 
They are of widely varying 
quality, accuracy and professionalism. 


In the ‘’‘'Family Tree Chart ” the five main headings list those Primary 
Scribal Versions which are known either because copies are available or 
there are credible published and oral reports that, in the case of the Thetford 
Transcript, it did at least exist at one time and a copy may yet surface. 


Under each of the five Scribal Version headings, there is a list of all distinct 
editions of that version of which I am aware which are (or at one time were) 
publicly available either as a file distributed on the net or as a book or CD 


Appendix 1-2 


1850 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


available for purchase. 
A number of the print editions are out of print and 
while copies may be found in libraries or used bookstores, there is otherwise 
no current commercial source for them. 
There is some indication that there 
may be yet other pre-publication manuscripts which have not yet surfaced. 


There is at least one “edition” a recent transcript of the Notes, which 
reliable sources indicate exists, but which is not available to the public, or 
even to me. 
Due to its unavailability, it is not listed. 


In addition to the 25 editions of the historical Scribal Versions, there are 
two other editions, one in print and one planned, which do not attempt to 
reproduce any one Scribal Version but draw on two or more and in that 
sense are Post-Scribal Eclectic Versions (see Section 5, page 12 of this 
Appendix). 
Setting out to achieve very different things than any 
reproduction of a Scribal Version they cannot be evaluated, for instance, as 
to how “accurately” they represent any particular version since they don’t 
attempt to represent any single version. 
These are discussed in section 5 
(page 13 of this appendix). 
As serious textual scholarship on A Course in 
Miracles begins to be done, we can expect more “post-scribal versions.” 


PROOF 


1851 


COPY 


Appendix 1-3 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


This list is current as of March 2008. 



1 . 


Shorthand Notes 1965-1978 (some of this remains unavailable) 



a) 

MPF 5 CD Facsimile Edition 



(2007) 


b) 

The Greene Facsimile Edition 



(2007) 


c) 

MPF cross-referenced “Toolbox” Edition 

(e-text) 

(2008) 


d) 

MPF "Toolbox" partial transcript 


(e-text) 

(2008) 

2. 


Thetford Transcript (little if anv of this has surfaced) 




(1965-197?) 





a) 

No positively identified copies known 




3. 


Urtext 1968? (rouahlv the same lenqth as the Notes, some “personal material” 


was removed and some “dictated without notes” 

material was added) 


a) 

Legacy Facsimile Edition 



(2000) 


b) 

Legacy E-text 

(e-text) 


(2000) 


c) 

MPF "Toolbox" Facsimile Edition 



(2008) 


d) 

MPF "Toolbox" 7 Volume Urtext 

(e-text) 


(2008) 


a) 

MIAP Complete 7 Volume Urtext 

(print) 


(2008) 

4. 


Huah Lvnn Cavce Version 1972 (-50,000 words removed from the Urtext) 


a) 

Legacy Facsimile Edition 



(1999)-* 


b) 

Legacy E-text 

(e-text) 


(1999) 


c) 

JCIM 

(print) 


(2000) 


d) 

Blue Sparkly 

(print) 


(2003) 


e) 

MPF “Corrected HLC" 

(print) 


(2006) 


f) 

MPF “Corrected HLC” 

(e-text) 


(2006) 


g) 

MPF Replica Edition 

(e-text) 


(2006) 

5. 


Nun’s (FiP) Version 1975 (-10,000 words removed from the HLC) 


a) 

Criswell Facsimile (Xerox) Edition 



(1975) 


b) 

FIP First Edition 

(print) 


(1976) 


c) 

FIP Second Edition 

(print) 


(1996) 


d) 

FIP Electronic ACIM 

(e-text) 


(1997) 


e) 

Legacy E-text (based on above) (e-text) 


(2000) 


f) 

EA Edition 

(print) 


(2006) 


g) 

Raincoast Edition 

(print) 


(2007) 


h) 

FIP Third Edition 

(print) 


(2007) 


i) 

MPF "Toolbox" FIP2 cross-referenced 

(e-text) 


(2008) 


See section 3 for descriptions of each edition. 



Appendix 1-4 


1852 

































Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


Legend of Nomenclature: 

Blue Sparkly: Thetford Foundation’s 4 volume hardcover edition (available in Australia 
and N.Z. 
only) 


E-text: 

A manuscript copied to a computer text-file copy which can be searched 
for text strings 

EA: 

Endeavor Academy 

Facsimile: 

A digitized photocopy of an original manuscript. 
Usually a PDF file, may 
also be printed 

FIP: 

Foundation for Inner Peace: FIP1: First Edition FIP2: Second Edition 

FIP3: Third Edition 

Greene: 

Raphael Greene’s publication of the Shorthand Notes 

HLC: 

Hugh Lynn Cayce (son of Edgar Cayce), the HLC Version was first 
shared with Cayce 

Legacy: 

E-text or facsimile first published anonymously on the net in the early 
days (2000) 

MIAP: 

Miracles in Action Press 

MPF: 

Miracles Pathway Fellowship publication 

Nun’s: 

The 1975 abridged manuscript was first typed by a Nun, and thus 
named “Nun’s Version” 

Raincoast: 

Raincoast Press 

Replica: 

An e-text which attempts keystroke for keystroke fidelity to source, 
including typos 


For contact and ordering information for these editions please see the end of this appendix. 



1853 


Appendix 1-5 




Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


2. 
Version History in brief 

The Many Editions, a Confusing Proliferation 

The proliferation of versions and editions of A Course in Miracles can 
be very confusing because while they differ substantially, they all claim a 
degree of “originality” few of them actually possess. 
To help the student 
navigate this very confusing scene, the “ Family Tree Chart” chronologically 
traces the origins and lineage of each version. 
In section 3 there are brief 
descriptions offering an outline of the distinguishing features and major 
differences between them. 
Several of these versions are available in multiple 
editions, each of which is in its own way unique. 


The Scribes, Helen Schucman and William Thetford, were involved in 
the production of five significantly different versions. 
Photocopies of only 
four of those five have come to light so far. 
While there is strong evidence of 
the fifth, little or none of it has yet surfaced. 
These four primary source 
versions reveal a great deal about how the Course evolved from the first 
Shorthand Notebooks. 


Until 1999 there was only one version of A Course in Miracles generally 
available. 
That was the Foundation for Inner Peace (FIP) First and Second 
Editions of the Nun’s Version. 
The Nun’s Version earned its name because 
the final typing was done by a nun. 
While it was widely known that there 
were “earlier versions,” there was little interest in these due to the fact that 
the spokespersons for FIP claimed there were “virtually no changes.” In any 
event, the earlier versions were not made available. 
In 2000 two older 
manuscripts, the Hugh Lynn Cayce (HLC) version and the Urtext were 
published on the net and in 2007 the original Shorthand Notebooks emerged. 

We now have copies of these four distinct versions distinguished by 
substantial differences in length, organization, and wording. 


Numerous published and oral accounts strongly suggest there is at least 
one other version - and possibly more than one - which has not yet surfaced. 

The uncertainty here arises due to published accounts indicating that two 
typed manuscripts were made for some volumes where only one has 
surfaced, and that three typed manuscripts were made for the Text where only 
two are known. 
This indicates that there is, or at least once was, at least one 
additional typed manuscript for each volume which has not yet come to light. 

There is some difference of opinion as to whether A) these accounts are 
inaccurate, that all manuscripts are present and accounted for or B) we’re 
missing an intermediate re-typing or C) we’re missing the original Thetford 
Transcript. 
After a careful examination of the evidence currently available, 


Appendix 1-6 


1854 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

the weight of probability points to “C” that there is a missing manuscript, and 
the missing manuscript is in fact the original transcript Bill Thetford typed to 
Helen Schucman’s oral dictation of her Notebooks. 
That same evidence 
suggests that the published accounts indicating that the Urtext is that 
Thetford Transcript are, in fact, mistaken. 


Whether one agrees with this conclusion 1 or not, in interpreting this 
“Family Tree Chart,” the Urtext is considered as the first known re-typing of 
the Thetford Transcript and not that original transcript itself. 
Should that 
ultimately prove to be incorrect, the labels will, of course, need adjusting. 


To some extent, each of these five historical “Scribal Versions” is the 
progenitor of the next. 
From one version to the next the Scribes copied from 
the immediately previous version and while copying, they modified the 
material. 
Unfortunately, due to a lack of proofreading many of the inevitable 
copying mistakes from one to the next were never detected and thus never 
corrected. 
In addition, intentional changes were made, some of which were 
genuine corrections of earlier errors, but many of which were actually the 
introduction of new errors. 
While some have argued that the earlier versions 
were “rough drafts” and the last version was a “finished product,” the textual 
evidence lends more support to the view that they are all “rough drafts.” 

Each contains mistakes not found in the others. 
Each also contains 
corrections of previous mistakes, some of which are not found in other 
versions. 
In a very real way then for A Course in Miracles there is no 
“finished product” since rather obviously a “finished product” would involve 
thorough proofreading to identify and correct all the mistakes and would 
include the complete original dictation. 
No such version yet exists. 


There are a few facts about the Course’s history on which all credible 
accounts agree. 


• the Notes represents the first written form. 
2 

• the Thetford Transcript is always described as a verbatim, orally 
proofed copy of the Notes and if that is true, isn’t really a different 
“version, ” but just a typed copy. 
This can’t really be verified until a copy of 
that Thetford Transcript becomes available for study. 
3 


1 The evidence is briefly presented and reviewed in Appendix II. 


2 There is some indication that a few portions of the Notes may have been written twice, possibly with 
some editing, as we do see a few passages repeated. 
However these instances appear more likely to be 
exceptions than evidence indicating the existence of two, different versions of the handwritten Notes. 


3 Insofar as these reports of the Thetford Transcript being a very accurate copy of the Notes are true, it 
may seem rather unimportant since we have the original Notes. 
There are, however, some parts of the 
Notes where legibility of available copies is poor, and generally handwriting doesn’t always provide a 
precise reading. 
One significant value of the Thetford Transcript lies in helping to correctly read those 
places in the Notes where legibility makes the reading questionable. 



1855 


Appendix 1-7 



Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

• the Urtext is the earliest typed manuscript currently available. 


• the HLC is a later abridgement of the Urtext, with some 50,000 fewer 
words 

• the 1975 Nun’s Version was an even later abridgement of the HLC, 
with about 10,000 fewer words than the HLC. 


• the Foundation for Inner Peace (FIP) First, Second and Third Editions 
involve only minor corrections to the 1975 edited Nun’s Version and as such 
can be considered as editions of that version rather than as unique versions in 
their own right. 


To add to an inherently confusing situation, while there are only five 
substantially different versions involved, there are dozens of different names 
being used for them leading to the impression that there are many more than 
five. 
Since many editions don’t actually indicate which version they are 
presenting, and some actually make inaccurate claims in that regard, it’s not 
always easy to tell which version any particular copy represents. 


The “ Family Tree Chart ” includes all the editions of each of these five 
“ Scribal Versions” of which I am aware at the time of writing (March 2008). 

There are other e-text editions circulating on the net which are generally of 
such erratic quality as to be undeserving of inclusion in the list. 
It’s quite 
possible other editions exist which deserve mention. 
Should you know of 
another edition or be preparing to release one, please let us know! We’ll 
certainly take a look at any new editions with an eye to their inclusion in this 
list. 


Terminology and Nomenclature 

While many different names have been applied to each version and 
edition, only the most original, historical names used in the earliest historical 
records, and where applicable, those used by the Scribes themselves, are used 
here. 


Some terminology is used in this discussion which may be unfamiliar to 
some, particularly terms relating to different kinds of editions. 
For those 
interested in a brief description of these various kinds of editions, the last 
section of this discussion (see section 6) will provide additional background 
information. 


The words “ version ” and “ edition ” can be, and often are used 
interchangeably. 
The reader should be aware that the word “ version ” is used 
in this discussion to indicate substantive content differences beyond the 
correction of errors, which leaves us with five historical “Scribal Versions. 
” 
The word “ edition ” is used to indicate each distinct rendition of any 


Appendix 1-8 


1856 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

particular “version.” So any given version could have any number of 
“editions.” While each edition will inevitably contain some differences from 
any other, the extent of those differences along with the intentions of the 
publisher determines whether it is classified as a new version or a new 
edition of an existing version. 


One could almost as easily swap the words “edition” and “version” and 
speak of five primary historical “editions” of which there are any number of 
different “versions” of each available. 
This is not so much a matter of 
“correct English” as it is one of “defining our terms” for the purposes of 
clarity and precision in this discussion. 


The model here is derived from Biblical scholarship where people speak 
of such things as the “King James Version” and the “ Revised Standard 
Version ” and the “New English Version ” of the Bible. 
Each is a unique 
translation of the original Elebrew and Greek manuscript copies of the Bible. 

Each of those “versions” has been published in many different “editions.” 
While the various editions may look very different, all contain pretty much 
exactly the same words although they may differ substantially in terms of ap¬ 
pendices, commentary, footnotes, etc. 
As soon as there is any significant 
modification of the actual wording, beyond “correcting typos,” however, the 
result is defined as a “new version.” 

We find that in the many editions of the numerous versions of the Bible, 
there is almost no difference at all in the actual wording, punctuation, 
reference structure, etc. 
You will also find that some “different versions” are 
in fact very similar to each other, having introduced only minor wording 
differences such as modernization of archaic terminology or introducing 
corrections based on new primary scholarship which was not available to the 
original translators. 
In short, any changes beyond correcting errors lead us to 
define the result as a new version rather than a new edition of an existing 
version. 
This does not include documented changes. 
For instance, since 
1611 when the King James Version was first published, primary Biblical 
scholarship has corrected a number of errors in the manuscripts the 1611 
translators used. 
Modem editions of the KJV generally include those 
corrections but they are footnoted or set in a different typestyle such that the 
reader can readily recognize them. 
This kind of change isn’t considered a 
“new version” because we are still in the realm of “correcting errors” in an 
existing version rather than generating a “new version.” 

Inevitably the border between “version” and “edition” as those words are 
defined in this discussion is going to be a bit fuzzy and some works may 
indeed straddle that border. 
How many differences do there have to be 
before a document ceases to be a “new edition” of an existing version and 


1857 


Appendix 1-9 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

becomes a “new version” entirely? It is probably impossible to achieve a 
precise answer. 
The basic indicator is the presence and frequency of 
intentional undocumented differences which go beyond “correction of 
errors.” 

There are some additional guidelines which are used here to answer the 
question. 
It should be remembered that all of the four available “historical 
versions” referred to here as Scribal Versions are roughly 85% identical. 
The 
intentional modifications can be classed as “corrections” or as “errors” or as 
“stylistic” changes which don’t actually correct or introduce any error in 
terms of overt content, they just fiddle with the wording. 
Simply generating 
a copy with inadvertent mistakes does not a new “version” make. 
That’s just 
an inaccurate edition. 
Where there are numerous intentional modifications of 
the material beyond simply correcting verified mistakes, well that does 
represent a new version. 
Of course determining whether a change is “minor” 
is subjective; what may seem “minor” to one might seem “substantive” to 
another. 
And how many do there have to be for us to say they are 
“numerous?” 

The Corrected HLC introduces variant readings for example, but each 
substantive change is a “correction” based on evidence of a mistake and not a 
newly minted original variant, and each one is documented showing the 
original wording so the complete original HLC is intact within that edition. 

Being confined to “corrections” where there is genuine evidence of a likely 
error, the differences do not constitute a “new version.” It is thus an 
annotated or critical edition of one Scribal Version. 
Other changes involve 
spelling and capitalization standardization which aren’t classed as 
“substantive” changes. 
Many English words have variant spellings approved 
of by dictionaries. 
It’s standard publishing practice to use a single variant in 
any particular volume. 
Since Schucman often used multiple different 
spellings, any editor of this work has to tackle this issue, one way or another. 

At the Miracles Pathway Fellowship we’ve generally chosen the spelling 
variant which US dictionaries say is the most commonly used in the USA 
since this work was produced in the USA by Americans and those spellings 
would be the most common in that place at that time. 
Further, it is easy for 
anyone anywhere in the world to find out what the most common US 
spellings are so as to predict how any given word might be spelled in our 
editions. 
There are a few exceptions where clarity argued for a spelling other 
than the most common in the USA. 


In the historical Scribal Versions one can be distinguished from another 
because, in addition to correcting or introducing typos from one version to 
the next, the editors have done some or all of the following: 


Appendix I -10 


1858 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

1) removed and/or added and/or re-arranged a significant amount of 
material 

2) made numerous adjustments to wording 

3) made extensive changes in punctuation and/or paragraphation 

4) introduced or altered chapter and section divisions 

5) changed the words which are emphasized, adding or deleting 
emphasis 

The reader will note imprecise and subjective terms such as “significant” 
and “numerous” here. 
I wish to repeat and stress that I consider “correction 
of error where there is solid evidence of a real error” a very different kind of 
editorial intervention than alterations which do not involve any error in what 
is being altered. 
Given that every version has “errors” we’d rather hope 
every edition would correct these, except of course for facsimile and replica 
editions whose unique purpose is to reproduce a manuscript as exactly as 
possible with no modifications. 
While I thi nk we’d all agree that two or 
three changes wouldn’t constitute a new version although several thousand 
certainly would, just where do you draw the line? There remains a degree of 
subjectivity and even controversy in this. 


For instance there is a “grey area” in the FIP Second Edition where we 
have the term “each other” in the original changed to “you and your brother” 
a number of times. 
Is that considered one change applied dozens of times or 
dozens of changes? While it can’t be considered a “correction of error” it 
certainly can be considered “minor.” In this case it is being judged as “below 
the threshold” for considering this a “new version.” It should also be noted 
that the changes in the FIP Second Edition are documented in an Errata 
which purports to list each modification. 
I did mention that some editions 
might “straddle the border” and this one does. 
On the other extreme, as 
noted already, if the Thetford Transcript turns out to be what is claimed for 
it, a precise copy of the Notes then it really isn’t a separate “version” it’s just 
another “edition” or the same material in a different form. 
Until we have a 
copy to check however, we have to assume that like all the other known 
copies produced by the Scribes, it has some differences and must therefore be 
classified as a separate version. 


There is also an enormous difference between “changes” which are not 
documented and those which are. 
An undocumented change is invisible to 
the reader. 
Documented changes are obvious. 
Invisible differences leave 
most readers with the impression what they’re reading is the “original” even 
when it is not, and that is the source of a great deal of confusion. 



1859 


Appendix I -11 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

The extent of each kind of change varies greatly from version to version 
and section to section within versions. 
Some material has never been 
changed at all and other material is changed almost beyond recognition, 
when it is preserved at all. 
We have as many as six variant readings of some 
passages, when the manuscript mark-up is taken into account. 
This is how 
one can distinguish the HLC from the Urtext for instance. 
Most of the time 
they are actually identical, but the paragraphation is different, the emphasis is 
different and sometimes the wording is different and many pages of material 
from the Ur are not included in the HLC. 
Similarly, there is material in the 
HLC which is not found in any earlier version. 
These differences are how we 
identify which Scribal Version we’re looking at. 


Should someone set out to reproduce A Course in Miracles and 
intentionally modify the material in any of the five ways noted above, this 
would be a “new version” unless of course the instances were “few” and 
“minor.” For instance, if one were to reproduce the Urtext version but 
change most of the emphasis, the punctuation and some of the paragraph 
breaks it would be misleading to say this is still the Urtext, even if one left all 
the wording intact, because numerous of the defining characteristics of that 
version have been altered. 


This is why Tom Whitmore’s “ Original Edition ” is not considered to be 
an edition of the HLC even though the wording is mostly the same. 
In the 
Text, much of the punctuation and emphasis and some of the paragraph and 
section breaks are Whitmore’s own original creative work and derive from 
no known Scribal Version. 
Some of the wording isn’t the HLC, it’s the 
Urtext. 
Some is simply “original.” In the Text volume alone Whitmore has 
introduced over 7,000 original variant readings, none of which are 
documented. 
The Workbook and Manual in that edition draw from several 
versions and confine themselves to none. 
Regardless of how one views these 
original modifications, they are so numerous as to make it an “original” 
version and not an attempt to reproduce any particular Scribal Version with 
precision. 
I anticipate we will see many more eclectic “original editions” 
which are really new versions in the future as various people wrestle with the 
variant readings between the Scribal Versions and develop different ideas as 
to what it really should say. 


Some have criticized this “ Original Edition ” as being a highly inaccurate 
representation of the HLC. 
I think that criticism is misplaced since it is very 
obvious that the intent here was not to produce an edition of the HLC but 
rather something “original.” 


Appendix 1-12 


1860 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

Similarly if the King James Version of the Bible was altered in just that 
way, the result could be said to be based on the KJV but it would still be a 
“new” and “original version.” 

If one were to adopt the emphasis, paragraph breaks and punctuation 
from the HLC while preserving the wording of the Urtext it would be an 
“Eclectic Version ” but it would not be either the HLC or the Urtext. 
It 
would be a new hybrid version containing characteristics of each of its 
parents. 
Were one to invent entirely new paragraphation, punctuation and 
emphasis, it would be an original “ Interpretive Version ” based on, but not 
even attempting to accurately reproduce the Urtext. 
If, in addition to 
selecting readings from more than one Scribal Version one introduced new 
and original variants of one’s own, it would be an “Original Edition. 
” 

However, when one takes a Scribal Version and inserts the HLC 
reference points, such as we have done with the Urtext, the fact that this 
overlay is documented means that the result is not a new “version” but rather 
a new “ Annotated Edition. 
” The reader is never left in any doubt as to what 
derived from the manuscript and what is an editorial overlay. 


There is another way of introducing extensive changes without the result 
being a “new version.” That is to footnote each and every change such that 
the original reading is preserved along with the modification. 
Arguably the 
“altered” form is a “new version” but since the edition retains the precise 
original material, that form is an “existing version.” This would be called an 
“annotated edition.” 

3. 
The Scribal Versions and Editions in detail 

The Shorthand Notes 

The Notes is the earliest written form of A Course in Miracles, but is the 
most recent of the versions to become available. 
Due to the fact that it is 
handwritten, partly in shorthand, it is much more difficult to read and render 
as an e-text than the later typed manuscripts. 
Further, it is only within the 
last year 4 that it has been generally available to scholarship. 
While I have 
been told that a complete transcript (e-text) of the Notes of good quality has 
been produced, it is not available so can’t be considered to be a “published 
edition.” The “partial transcript” (Id) listed is my own transcription which at 
the moment includes all of the Notes for the Use of Terms, Song of Prayer, 
and the first two and last chapters of the Text. 
It is my hope that anyone who 
is in possession of any transcriptions of any of the Notes will make that 


4 The first general publications of Notes material took place in August 2007. 
This Appendix was 
written in March 2008. 



1861 


Appendix 1-13 



Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

material public such that a complete searchable e-text can soon be available 
to scholarship. 
Such an e-text of the Notes is not a substitute for the original 
manuscript, it is more of an index to it since it provides a searchable text 
which is easy to read, a great convenience to anyone reading the Notes. 

Without a searchable text it is difficult and time-consuming to find anything 
in the facsimile editions. 


Generally however the Urtext is mostly an accurate transcript of the 
Notes. 
It is far from perfect but using the MPF e-text and the MPF facsimile 
editions which use the same chapter, section and paragraph reference system, 
it is very easy to look up most passages in the Urtext e-text and then find the 
corresponding Notes page. 
Both of these are available in e-text form on the 
Scholar’s Toolbox data disk. 


The cross-referenced “ Toolbox ” edition (1c) organizes the Notes 
according to the volume, chapter, and section divisions used in all MPF 
primary source publications. 
The material is also cross-referenced according 
to the volume and page number in the “22 Volumes of Helen Schucman’s 
Unpublished Writings.” This collection fits on a single CD and to squeeze it 
all in the resolution of the image files had to be reduced. 
While the 
resolution is generally high enough for reading on screen or printing at 
100%, if greater magnification is desired, one should turn to the 5 CD 
Facsimile Edition. 


This material is presented in PDF format. 
“Bookmarks” are used to 
indicate all the volume, chapter, and section divisions, making this a very 
convenient tool for quick reference except for the high resolution 5 CD 
Facsimile Edition (la) of the Notes which is referenced only by the original 
volume and page number designations. 
These designations also appear in the 
e-text and the Scholar’s Toolbox editions for easy cross-referencing. 
The 
images are of higher quality than any of the other known publications and 
maximum readability of segments with poor legibility can be found here. 


The Greene Facsimile (1b) uses an entirely unique reference system and 
is not readily amenable to cross-referencing to other editions or versions. 
It 
also omits the volume identifiers and title pages from the 22 Volumes. 

Otherwise it is largely identical in content. 
Resolution is good but contrast is 
excessive turning “grey areas” either white or black. 
This makes for a 
“crisp” looking image but actually degrades faint images such that areas of 
poor legibility lose definition although it preserves areas of good legibility 
quite well. 



Appendix 1-14 


1862 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

The Thetford Transcript 

The issues relating to the identification of both the Thetford Transcript 
and the Urtext are dealt with in detail elsewhere 5 . 
While positive 
identification is elusive, there is some evidence that the Psychotherapy and 
Song of Prayer volumes might be the Thetford Transcript as they do bear 
some signs of oral dictation. 
There is little to suggest that any of the other 
typed manuscripts represent an original manuscript typed to oral dictation 
while there is much to suggest that they are later edited re-typings. 
The MPF 
“Toolbox ” (2a) collection contains those typed manuscripts which may be 
part of that original Thetford Transcript. 


The Urtext Version 

There are eight separate typed manuscripts labelled “ Urtext ”, one each 
for the Text, Workbook, Manual for Teachers, Use of Terms, Psychotherapy, 
Song of Prayer, Gifts of God and Special Messages. 
The word “ Urtext ” in 
this discussion refers to that entire collection. 
Some use Urtext to refer only 
to the Text volume. 
Some refer to this collection as “the typescript” but, 
since all the manuscripts except for the handwritten Notes are “typescripts” 
this causes more confusion than clarity. 


I suspect that the Scribes may indeed have only referred to the Text vol¬ 
ume as an “urtext.” However this material is categorized as “urtext” in the 
original and we’ve chosen to try to minimize confusion by not attempting to 
dream up yet another new name. 
The only publication to include all of this 
material in both facsimile and e-text editions is the “ Toolbox ” edition (3c and 
3d). 
The MPF editions all include cross-referencing based on the original 
scribal chapter and section divisions of the HLC. 


Seven of these Urtext volumes are widely, but not universally, 
considered “canonical” although the Special Messages are viewed as suspect 
by many. 
6 The Special Messages are not included as canonical but are 
included in the Scholar’s Toolbox on disk as an interesting supplement. 



5 The evidence is thoroughly reviewed in Appendix II. 


6 There are differences of opinion as to what material is or isn’t “canonical.” Initially ACIM appeared 
in three volumes, Text , Workbook, and Manual for Teachers. 
At that time, in 1975, the other material 
had not yet been written. 
Shortly thereafter a fourth volume, Use of Terms was added, but wasn’t called 
a fourth volume, it was called an appendix to Volume III. 
There is some dispute as to whether the Use 
of Terms should be considered canonical. 
Whitmore’s three volume Original Edition, for instance, 
doesn’t include it. 
The Blue Sparkly moves it to the front of the book as a kind of introduction. 
FIP 
included all four volumes in all of its editions, while still calling the fourth volume an appendix to 
Volume III, until the Third Edition in which the Psychotherapy and Song of Prayer volumes were 
added, but the Gifts of God was not added. 
Two of the HLC editions include only the Text volume 
because the HLC is only the Text volume. 
To date no edition has included the Special Messages as 
“canonical.” 


1863 


Appendix 1-15 



Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

Beginning in the summer of 2000, portions of these Urtext facsimile (3a) 
copies were circulated on the net. 
Obtaining the complete collection has 
been a challenge and it’s difficult to be sure it has all been located. 
To date I 
am not aware of anything missing in the Urtext collection. 
We can only be 
certain when the entire collection of original primary source material finally 
becomes available for scholarly scrutiny. 
The “Legacy Facsimiles” which 
have been circulating since 2000 (3a) are of varying quality and 
completeness. 
It is difficult to determine their number since no catalogue of 
such different unique collections exist, but there are at least several. 
The 
difference is in the total number of pages and the sequencing of those pages. 

The MPF “ Scholar’s Toolbox ” (3c) and (3d) compilation includes, as far as 
can be ascertained, all of the material in its original sequence with two minor 
exceptions dealt with in the Editor’s Notes in those volumes in which 
segments of the Special Messages are inserted into the text in the exact 
location the Scribes themselves inserted this material in the HLC. 
Although 
labelled “Special Messages, ” these segments are deemed to be later “dictated 
corrections and clarifications” in our view and also apparently in the view of 
the Scribes. 
In short, rather than being deemed “special” and of a personal or 
private nature, these segments are considered to be canonical material 
“dictated without notes.” 

In August of 2000 the “ Legacy E-text ” (3b) of the Urtext appeared on the 
net. 
Portions of this document are quite accurate reproductions of the Urtext 
manuscript but large portions are actually the HLC. 
The MPF “ Toolbox ” e- 
text edition (3d) is not 100% accurate but is vastly more accurate than its 
predecessor since it has all been proofed, although not proofed to the degree 
of thoroughness which is desirable. 
The proofing of that document is an on¬ 
going project. 


The MPF Complete Seven Volume Urtext (3e) is available in print. 

Including some segments of the Notes which were omitted in the Urtext 
apparently inadvertently, it is the most complete print edition of A Course in 
Miracles writings known. 


The HLC Version 

The only facsimile copy of the HLC manuscript which has been 
published is that which was found in November 1999 at the Association for 
Research and Enlightenment Library in Virginia Beach, Virginia, USA. 
(4a) 
The HLC includes only the Text volume. 
An e-text of poor quality (4b) was 
hastily created within weeks of the discovery and began circulating on the 
net on January 6, 2000. 
Additional proofing of that document was 
undertaken in the following months and it appeared in print as “Jesus ’ 

Course in Miracles ” (JCIM) (4c) in March of 2000. 
The proofing was not 


Appendix 1-16 


1864 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

complete. 
There were several hundred typos which went uncorrected. 
It is 
otherwise a substantially accurate reproduction of the HLC manuscript. 


In 2003 the Thetford Foundation in Australia produced a handsome print 
edition called “Blue Sparkly” (4d) after its cover design. 
This included the 
FILC text which is nearly identical to the JCIM (4c) text, typos and all. 
It also 
includes the Workbook, Manual, and Use of Terms derived from Urtext e- 
texts. 
No precise tabulation of the accuracy of this volume is available but it 
appears to be an honest effort to publish an accurate presentation with the 
inadequate proofing which is so typical of A Course in Miracles publishers 
since the beginning. 
Most of the Legacy Edition typos persist, for instance, 
although some have been corrected. 
Spelling is sometimes altered, but 
inconsistently. 


In 2006 the Corrected HLC, (4e) a thoroughly proofed edition of the 
HLC Text volume was published. 
It is available in both print and e-text 
formats. 
This includes a number of “corrections” of apparently inadvertent 
omissions and other errors which arose in the scribal copying from the 
Urtext. 
All deviations from the manuscript are footnoted and explained such 
that the reader can readily distinguish between the original scribal text and 
editorial “correction.” This volume also includes two complete reference 
systems. 
One is based on the traditional “chapter/section/paragraph” 
numbering and one is based on the original manuscript page numbers. 
This 
makes it very easy to check the manuscript facsimile against either the e-text 
or paper editions and facilitates cross-referencing to other editions and 
versions. 
The MPF “Toolbox" contains a significantly enhanced PDF format 
facsimile edition (4f) which includes bookmarks for all the chapter and 
section breaks in order to assist quick cross-referencing with other editions. 


Also in 2006 MPF released an “HLC Replica ” (4g) edition which 
attempts to reproduce the original manuscript keystroke for keystroke with 
no corrections. 
All of the original spelling mistakes and other typos are 
preserved. 
This was initially created as a proofing tool and can be used to 
quickly check any e-text of the HLC to see where differences exist. 
It is 
currently available as an e-text only. 


The Nun’s Version (Foundation for Inner Peace version) 

From 1975 until 2000 this was the only version of A Course in Miracles 
generally available and was advertised as, and widely but mistakenly 
believed to be, “virtually unchanged” from the original dictation. 
In fact it is 
about 60,000 words shorter than the Urtext in the Text volume and roughly 
10,000 words shorter than the HLC. 
After chapter eight of the Text the 


1865 


Appendix 1-17 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

magnitude of the differences declines dramatically such that later portions 
can fairly be described as at least “substantially unchanged.” 

Portions of the original Nun’s Version manuscript in facsimile form have 
been circulated on the net. 
(5d) 

In June of 1976 the Foundation for Inner Peace (FIP) undertook the first 
large-scale printing of this book in what has become known as the “ First 
Edition.” (5b) In fact the first printing of several hundred copies occurred in 
August of 1975 in what is kn own as the “ Criswell Edition ” sometimes 
nicknamed the “Xerox Edition .” (5a) This was a facsimile edition in which 
the manuscript pages of the Nun’s Version were photocopied at 50% of their 
original size. 
In each of the multiple re-printings of the FIP First Edition 
minor differences involving corrections of typos appeared, making each 
slightly different. 
In 1992 FIP released its Second Edition (5c). 
This 
involved even more corrections of earlier typos and was the first to include a 
reference system printed in the margins. 
It was also the first known attempt 
to proofread any version against the original manuscripts. 
While hundreds of 
errors were detected and corrected, hundreds more, including some glaringly 
obvious ones, were missed. 
It was “proof-reading” but it wasn’t “thorough 
proof-reading.” Thi s is meant less as a criticism than an observation in¬ 
tended to draw attention to the very large need for thorough and more 
professional proof-reading. 


Recently FIP has produced a Third Edition (5g) which includes the 
Psychotherapy and Song of Prayer volumes. 


Since 2003 at least two other publishers, Endeavor (5e) and Raincoast 
(5f) have introduced print editions of at least portions of the Nun’s Version, 
although without the FIP reference system. 


In editing the HLC into the Nun’s Version, some chapter and section 
breaks and names were changed from the original HLC values. 
To facilitate 
cross-referencing all other versions an e-text of the FIP Second Edition was 
created which restores the original reference points where that was possible. 

In the early chapters it is not always possible due to the massive removal and 
re-arrangement of the material in that version. 
The only reason for restoring 
these reference points was to provide a research tool to make it easier to 
check material in the FIP edition against other versions. 
This edition is the 
complete text of the Second Edition with references from the HLC.( 5h) 

There is one additional edition which is worthy of mention but doesn’t 
readily fit into any of our categories. 
That is the Sonship Gift three-column 
parallel edition of the first eight chapters of the Urtext, HLC, and FIP2 
produced by Raphael Greene in 2002. 
The first eight chapters are where 


Appendix 1-18 


1866 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

most of the editing took place. 
This edition, distributed as a PDF file, allows 
for a text search of all three of those versions across the first eight chapters 
and makes it easy to tell at a glance whether a given passage was ever 
altered. 
The base texts Greene used were carefully proofed near-replicas of 
the respective manuscripts which attempt to reflect not only every original 
keystroke, but also the handwritten mark-up. 


4. 
The Seven Volumes 

Just to make it a bit more confusing, each of the seven volumes included 
in the Urtext collection has a somewhat unique history of its own. 
The 
previous discussion of “versions” applies primarily to the Text volume. 
The 
HLC version includes only the Text volume. 
There is no reliable evidence 
that the HLC ever included any other volumes. 


The other volumes were all scribed later, in the case of the Gifts of God, 
several years later. 
Here’s a brief summary of the other volumes. 


In the first printing of A Course in Miracles, the 1975 Criswell Edition of 
the Nun’s Version, we find the first three volumes, Text, Workbook and 
Manual for Teachers. 
In 1976, the FIP First Edition was published as three 
separate books, and a fourth volume, which Schucman scribed after the 
Criswell publication, called Clarification of Terms, was added to the 
smallest of the three, the Manual for Teachers. 
We call the Clarification of 
Terms by its original name, Use of Terms except when dealing explicitly with 
the FIP version. 


In subsequent FIP editions this fourth volume is treated as an appendix to 
Volume 3, rather than as a separate volume. 
However, in the FIP 
Concordance, it is treated as a separate volume. 
Since it was written two 
years later than Volume 3, and is no more related to Volume 3 than any other 
volume, we’ve opted to deal with it as a distinct volume rather than as an 
appendix. 


Subsequent to the First Edition’s publication in 1976, Schucman scribed 
or completed the scribing of three additional volumes, Psychotherapy, Song 
of Prayer and Gifts of God. 


In 2005 in the Six Volume Concordance published by MPF, volumes 5 
and 6, Psychotherapy and Song of Prayer, were included in the A Course in 
Miracles canon as they are in the FIP Concordance. 


In its 2008 Third Edition, FIP followed this practice and included its own 
edited versions of volumes 5 and 6. 
Previously these were published as 
separate “pamphlets” by FIP. 



1867 


Appendix 1-19 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

In 2008 the Gifts of God was added as a seventh volume. 
This has also 
previously been published by FIP in a collection of Schucman’s own poetry 
under the same name. 
In the view of many this is also “scribed” material 
rather than Schucman’s own composition and it is a thoroughly fitting 
“conclusion” to A Course in Miracles. 
No Notes material for this seventh 
volume has yet been located. 
Unlike the other volumes, we have only a 
single primary source for Volume 7. 
That is the collection of Urtext 
manuscripts in the 22 Volumes of Helen Schucman’s Unpublished Writings. 


Opinions do vary on the “authenticity” of some of the later volumes, 
most notably Use of Terms. 
Some do not consider it “canonical” at all while 
the Thetford Foundation includes it as a preface to their Blue Sparkly edition. 

We adopted an inclusive policy. 
Where there is a substantial body of opinion 
viewing material as authentic, despite the fact that opinions do vary, we 
chose to include it. 


And this concludes the brief descriptions of the 25 editions of the five 
Scribal Versions which are currently known outlined in the “Family Tree ” 
on page 3. 


5. 
Post-Scribal Versions 

As noted previously, a distinction is made between editions of A 
Course in Miracles which honestly attempt to reproduce an historical Scribal 
Version with no changes beyond correcting apparently inadvertent mistakes 
and those editions which differ frequently in any of five ways: wording, 
punctuation, paragraphation, reference divisions, or emphasis. 
The two 
versions discussed here do indeed differ in all five ways from any known 
historical Scribal Version. 
Thus neither can be called an “edition of this 
version” or an “edition of that version.” Each is a unique, original, new 
version with a particular relationship to one or more of the historical Scribal 
Versions, or as is the case with one, no relationship to any historical Scribal 
Version at all at many points. 


The Eclectic Critical Version 

While not yet complete, the “Eclectic Critical Version ” is a goal towards 
which some of us have been working for years. 
A group is being formed to 
coordinate this work. 
7 It will not be an “edition” of any existing version 
although nearly every word, comma and paragraph break in it will likely 
derive from at least one of the historical Scribal Versions. 
The plan for this 
Critical Edition is to examine all variant readings between all historical 


7 Should you be interested in lending a hand, e-mail dthomp74@hotmail. 
com 

Appendix 1-20 1868 



Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

Scribal Versions and using the methodology of textual scholarship, attempt 
to establish which of the variants is the most authentic. 
The objective is not 
to invent entirely new readings or “change” the content. 
Rather, where the 
content has already been changed, the intent is to sift through the changes 
and at least clean up the inadvertent errors. 
In short, where the respective 
Scribal Versions differ, the objective of a Critical Edition is to determine 
which variant is the best; which is the “correction” and which is the “error.” 

This project is modeled on the work of Biblical scholarship in dealing 
with the many variant readings which arise in ancient manuscript copies of 
the Bible. 
The variants are catalogued and carefully studied with the aim of 
establishing which variant is the most authentic. 
The result is a “consensus 
text” of the Hebrew and Greek Bible. 
It is not entirely an exact copy of any 
particular original historical source but if the scholars have done their work 
well, it is actually closer to the “original” than any of them. 


When dealing with material of extraordinary spiritual and religious 
significance such as A Course in Miracles or the Bible, it can be important, 
even if not crucial, to establish as closely as possible what the authentic 
wording really is. 


When this methodology is applied to the Course, the result will be a 
version with the most authentic reading which scholarship can achieve. 


Every instance of variant readings will be documented so that the reader can 
see what the variants are and why the scholars came to the conclusions they 
did. 
All available historical versions and relevant primary source materials 
will be consulted and compared. 
In that process at the very least, all the 
inadvertent copying errors should be detected and corrected. 
In all cases the 
reader will be able to see each variant and make up her own mind. 
Where it 
is unclear whether a given change was a correction of a previous mistake or 
the introduction of a new mistake, the editorial board will have to determine 
relatively probabilities and inform the reader of the residual uncertainty. 


Rather clearly a work with such attributes cannot be considered an 
“edition” of any particular historical “version” but rather an entirely new, 
post-scribal version even though every word and comma might derive from 
one or another of the historical Scribal Versions. 
Relative to any particular 
Scribal Version it will differ in number of words, specific wording, 
emphasis, paragraphation and punctuation. 
It is “post-scribal” because 
while it will consist entirely of the Scribes’ own words and introduce no 
variant not found in one of their versions, it won’t have the benefit of their 
direct participation and consultation. 
Although based on their work it will not 
actually be their work since they aren’t here to consult with. 
The overriding 
objective will be to ascertain the “author’s intent.” 


1869 


Appendix 1-21 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

In time any number of such “versions” may appear in which publishers 
draw on two or more of the historical versions and combine elements from 
each. 


Whitmore’s Interpretive “Original Edition” 

One “ Interpretive Eclectic Version ” already exists in Tom Whitmore’s 
Original Edition. 
Now by the working definitions of “edition” and “ version ” 
used in this discussion, this would be called an “Original Version ” since it is 
not in fact an “edition” of any of the historical Scribal Versions. 
This is not 
to say it’s a mistake to call it an “ edition ” just to point out that these two 
words can be and are often used interchangeably and to be clear as to which 
meaning is intended. 
Whitmore calls it an “ Original Edition ” but within the 
definitions of this discussion, it is an “ Original Version .” 

Whitmore’s “ Original Edition ” includes entirely original eclectic 
interpretive versions of the Text, Workbook, and Manual for Teachers which 
differ significantly from any known historical Scribal Version. 
It truly is 
“original” in that the paragraphation, punctuation, and emphasis are 
frequently Whitmore’s own original creative work. 
It is this introduction of 
original new unexplained and undocumented variant readings, roughly seven 
thousand of them in the Text volume alone, that makes it an “ interpretive ” 
version and its selection of variants from more than one Scribal Version 
which makes it an “ eclectic ” version. 
It draws both on several Scribal 
Versions and introduces unique original material, some examples of which 
are discussed below. 
If the variations from any particular version were 
merely accidental, and were few in number, one might call any of these 
volumes “editions” of an historical version with inadequate proofing. 
But 
while there appear to be a few hundred such inadvertent changes, there are 
many thousands of apparently intentional changes. 
Since none of them are 
documented, it is a matter of guesswork to determine which changes are 
copying mistakes and which are intentional editing changes. 
Either way, it’s 
not an “edition” of a Scribal Version nor does it appear that the editors 
aspired to the goal of accurate reproduction, despite what they say in their 
Preface. 


By and large the Original Edition contains the HLC wording in the Text 
volume, and includes, but doesn’t document, some of the error corrections 
from the earlier Corrected HLC (4e) derived from the Urtext. 
Many of the 
words emphasized in the HLC are not emphasized in the Original Edition 
and many of the words emphasized in the Original Edition are not 
emphasized in the HLC or, for that matter, in any Scribal Version. 

Punctuation is significantly transformed, apparently at random, which, in 
some cases, changes the meaning. 
Again this is done with no reference to any 


Appendix 1-22 


1870 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


Scribal Version. 
In some cases “spelling” changes alter the tense or disrupt 
contractions which were needed for iambic pentameter. 
Spelling, 
capitalization, grammar and emphasis are largely Whitmore’s “original” 
creative work and sometimes, so is the wording. 
Subjunctive verbs are 
changed to past tense or past conditional tense, for instance. 
None of the 
7,000 plus deviations from the original HLC manuscript in the Text volume 
are documented or explained except in the cryptic phrase in the Preface 
which states that 

“The only changes that have been made to the edition [or version] of the 
Course as completed by Shucman [sic] and Thetford have been to correct 
obvious typographic errors and misspellings, to modernize and render 
consistent punctuation and capitalization, and to format the material for print 
publication.” 

While that could be a description of a Critical Edition of a Scribal 
Version, what Whitmore produced is in fact a highly original Interpretive 
Eclectic Version. 
This is truly an “original” way of using the words 
“modernize” and “consistent” since the spelling, capitalization and 
punctuation modifications introduced in this work are neither “modem” nor 
“consistent.” 

For instance in the case of commas being used with conjunctions, at one 
time “newspaper style guides” dictated getting rid of commas since they 
generally aren’t strictly necessary. 
In newspapers every bit of space counts 
and reducing commas saves space. 
It can also encourage reporters and 
editors to write more succinctly and avoid complex compound sentences that 
require commas. 
It’s possible that removal of commas beside conjunctions 
could be considered “modernizing” in that sense. 
Recent research has shown 
however that the average reader can read faster and with higher 
comprehension if the commas are left in, since they provide visual cues to 
the clause structure within a compound sentence. 
It’s almost always possible 
to parse the clauses after reading the sentence with no punctuation. 
The 
commas allow one to identify clause divisions before reading the sentence, 
which increases reading speed and comprehension. 
In the case of the 
sometimes highly complex sentence structure of ACIM, removing commas 
often introduces ambiguity in material that was originally quite clear. 


“Modem” style guides advise the use of commas wherever they enhance 
clarity and readability. 
Whitmore has removed many of the commas that 
appeared alongside conjunctions, but did not do so consistently. 
While that 
is usually not a hugely significant alteration, it’s not reasonably described as 
“modem.” Kenneth Wapnick, who helped Schucman in the final editing, 
describes how comma usage was discussed and the decision was made to go 


1871 


Appendix 1-23 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

heavy on the commas in order to enhance readability, which as noted, is 
exactly what it does. 
Interestingly, in the four Scribal Versions we have to 
compare, we can see that the Scribes rarely made any changes to the original 
punctuation in the Notes. 
When they do it is usually the replacement of one 
“pause” mark for another, such as the replacement of a comma with a period, 
colon, or semi-colon, which changes would not influence “how it sounds.” 
And remember, this work began as an oral dictation, and if the Scribe taking 
it down inserted a “pause mark” where the Voice paused, then is a strong 
case for leaving it there because it is part of the “original” oral content. 
In 
most cases it is clear from the character spacing in the Notes that Schucman 
usually inserted the commas as she wrote the words and did not often go 
back later to figure out where the punctuation should be. 
Given that, I see no 
reason to suppose the punctuation was Schucman’s arbitrary decision rather 
than her recording actual pauses in what she “heard.” 

In the case of poetry, and much of the Course is blank verse poetry in 
iambic pentameter, rare indeed is the editor who would presume to alter or 
“modernize” any poet’s suggested punctuation according to the dictates of 
any prose style guide! There are no “style guides” for the punctuation of 
bla nk verse poetry and the attempt to edit any poet’s punctuation can 
certainly be described as “original.” 

The Original Edition also includes an entirely original reference system 
of paragraph numbers within chapters rather than the conventional technique 
of counting paragraph numbers within sections. 
Sadly, the original 
manuscript page numbers are removed making it extremely cumbersome to 
cross-reference this version to any other. 
Due to the fact that Whitmore did 
not always maintain the same paragraph structure as that found in the HLC 
manuscript, these references are not amenable to use on any other edition or 
version of A Course in Miracles. 


6. 
Different kinds of editions 

A Course in Miracles is a different sort of book than those most of us 
usually deal with. 
Most new books are written by a human, edited to some 
extent, submitted to a publisher, edited a bit more by the publisher with the 
collaboration of the author, and then they appear in print more or less exactly 
as the author wishes them to appear. 
It’s fairly rare for a book to go to a 
second printing and rarer still to go to a second edition. 
For most books no 
question ever arises as to what the “authentic text” is, it is what is on the 
page! But then most books don’t claim authorship by Jesus of Nazareth. 



Appendix 1-24 


1872 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

That fact, if no other, demands that every effort be made to precisely and 
accurately reproduce the original with no undocumented deviations. 


Then there are “classics” whose authors have passed away which, while 
they also always begin with a manuscript and then are printed in a “First 
Edition,” end up becoming available in numerous editions and versions of 
various kinds, some of which are briefly mentioned below. 
In a few cases 
multiple early “versions” with variant readings of a classic emerge making it 
less than immediately obvious what the “authentic” or “original” text 
actually is. 
Where such questions arise, textual scholarship begins. 
Where 
the author is not available to consult and multiple “versions” of a text turn 
up, questions inevitably arise as to which of the variant readings should be 
considered most “authentic,” which result from later copying mistakes, and 
which results from later corrections introduced by the author. 


Different versions and editions are generally intended for different 
audiences and different applications as discussed below. 


Facsimile Editions are essentially photocopies, often in colour and of 
very high quality, of original historical documents. 
Good ones are almost as 
useful for many purposes as the originals themselves and can save scholars a 
great deal of travel to inspect the originals. 
Especially with handwriting, 
there is “content” in the original manuscript page that no typed copy can 
fully capture. 
Facsimiles can capture most, but never all of that. 
For 
instance, it is sometimes only possible to tell whether a “dot” is an original 
pen stroke or a speck of dirt by microscopically inspecting the original 
manuscript, but not from any photographic copy. 
Similarly, if dating is an 
issue, the original medium is more helpful than any photocopy. 
Short of 
those physical issues with the original medium, facsimile editions are 
exceedingly useful for many purposes. 
Facsimile editions are of primary 
interest to serious scholars who want to check and double-check against the 
most primary of sources for previously undetected interpretive clues, or 
indeed simply to check a given copy’s accuracy. 
Given that there are known 
inaccuracies in every extant edition, “checking accuracy” is a regrettable 
necessity. 


Replica Editions are a character by character typed e-text representation 
with original typos preserved. 
Nothing is changed; it is a “slavish copy” as 
exact to the original in all regards as possible. 
Being “machine searchable” 
these can be useful as “indices” to a facsimile and for analysis with pattern 
recognition software. 
They are principally research tools of interest to 
primary textual scholarship. 
Few readers want the spelling mistakes 
preserved, but some do! The spelling inconsistencies may themselves 
contain information. 



1873 


Appendix 1-25 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

Critical (or scholarly) Editions include an “annotation apparatus” in 
which any “problem readings” are subject to scholarly commentary. 
These 
annotations are basically compendia of previous scholarship and are useful to 
subsequent scholarship. 
They provide the reader with some of the results of 
previous scholarship on these “problems” and may identify areas of 
uncertainty which require further research. 
These are generally produced by 
scholars for scholars, but “scholars” aren’t confined to professionals who get 
paid for it. 
Anyone seriously interested in investigating possible nuances of 
meaning in any passage will find such a resource to be useful. 
Good Critical 
Editions form the basis for all serious secondary scholarship and subsequent 
primary scholarship. 


Interpretive Editions may or may not be scholarly, although those which 
achieve significant influence usually are. 
They are characterized by a degree 
of “editorial intervention” beyond merely correcting apparent errors. 
Rather 
than works of primary scholarship intended to reproduce an historical version 
accurately, these are “interpretive works” of secondary scholarship, are 
generally based on the best available primary scholarship, and are intended 
to mine subtle nuances of meaning. 
They reflect the opinion of their editors 
on the intended meaning rather than trying to capture the precise original 
text. 
Their objective is not reproduction; it is “interpretation.” 

It should be understood that the purpose of an Interpretive Edition is 
entirely different than that of a Critical Edition. 
Each reflects a very 
different approach. 
Interpretive Editions tend to be more accessible and 
easier to tackle for those new to the material while Critical Editions focus on 
precise accuracy, and sometimes this is at the expense of readability. 
With 
any book, if you just want to quickly skim through it to get a sense of it, you 
certainly will find footnotes distracting. 
When it comes time to delve into a 
particular passage in depth, however, those footnotes can prove helpful. 


Popular Editions are generally based on a scholarly edition but omit the 
scholarly apparatus such as footnotes, marginalia and explanatory essays. 

This makes it possible to publish a less expensive, more compact product for 
a non-professional audience. 
The same attention to accuracy is expected, but 
they are “stripped down” for a general readership. 


Urtext Editions (“urtext” is a German word meaning literally “pre-text”) 
are common with classical musical scores and the word is applied to some 
editions of literary works. 
The term “ urtext edition ” is often used as an 
approximate synonym for a kind of “ scholarly edition ” which draws from 
multiple primary sources with the intent to reproduce the author’s original 
intent. 
This can also be, and often is, referred to as an “ eclectic edition.” 
Again, it is not intended to reproduce any single source, but is intended to 


Appendix 1-26 


1874 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

capture “the intended meaning” as deduced from a rigorous comparison of 
multiple primary sources. 


Eclectic Editions compare multiple primary sources and select from the 
variant readings according to some set of editorial principles, rather than 
attempting the direct reproduction of a single historical version. 
Those who 
select among variants rather obviously have as their intent the selection of 
the best or most authentic of the known variants. 
If the editorial principles 
are sound, and if their application is rigorous and methodical, and if the 
editors are skilled, the result can actually be a more authentic and accurate 
rendering than any of the individual primary sources. 
In the absence of 
sound scholarship, the result can be mere subjective whim which tells us 
more about the editor than the material being edited. 


Of course any particular edition may reflect more than a single category. 


Perhaps there is no better example than the Bible. 
The “original 
manuscripts” of Biblical books were all written well over 1800 years ago, in 
some cases much more. 
None of the original autographs has survived. 
Some 
Biblical material may have originated orally and have been passed down 
through many generations before ever being written down, during which time 
any number of variants might have arisen and been lost. 
What has survived 
from antiquity is a large collection of manuscripts and manuscript fragments, 
mostly at least several hundred years removed from their first being written 
down, all of which are copies of vanished copies through an unknown 
number of generations of vanished copies of a vanished original. 
In the 
process of repeated copying over centuries, variant readings arise both my 
mistake and by design. 
This results in a large number of variant readings or 
differences between various copies of the same material. 


Primary Biblical scholarship is the discipline which, using techniques 
sometimes reminiscent of crime scene investigators, sifts through the 
archaeological evidence for the clues these fragments can provide as to what 
the “original text” might have been. 


Virtually all contemporary Bible translations, for instance, work from 
“eclectic critical editions” of the Hebrew Old Testament and Greek New 
Testament known as a “ consensus text.”* A consensus text is created by a 
panel of scholars who evaluate variant readings and discuss and debate their 
merits until they establish a “consensus” as to which is the most authentic 
variant. 



8 Unfortunately for Course students, no such “consensus text” of ACIM yet exists, rather there are 
several different versions which vary enormously in length and wording. 
Hopefully this discussion will 
at least provide the student with some critical awareness of what the differences, strengths and 
weaknesses of each are. 



1875 


Appendix I - 27 



Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


This represents the consensus among many scholars as to the best (most 
original and authentic) of the known variant readings for any passage in the 
Bible rather than any particular ancient manuscript. 
Such “consensus texts” 
are the fruits of primary textual scholarship and are the raw materials for 
secondary textual scholarship, two closely related but very different branches 
of textual scholarship. 
Primary scholarship has as its aim the establishment 
of the authentic text and comes into play wherever there are variant readings 
or questions about textual authenticity. 
In the case of the Bible it is a vast 
field because there are so many variants among available ancient source 
materials. 
Secondaiy scholarship seeks to interpret the text and, of course, 
starts with the best and most authentic text primary scholarship can produce. 

Of course there is some spill-over between the two. 
In the process of 
interpreting a passage a secondary scholar may delve into primary 
scholarship issues and question the authenticity of particular variants and in 
the process of sifting variants, primary scholars may well look at “inter¬ 
pretive clues” which derive from secondary scholarship. 


The situation of the Bible is very similar to that of A Course in Miracles 
although it is often perceived very differently. 
Course students debate 
“which version is best” but rarely do Christians debate which ancient 
“version” of a Biblical passage is the best, when there are differences. 


Rather they look to primary scholarship and such things as scholarly 
“consensus texts” for the “most authentic reading.” Course students don’t do 
that for one simple reason: there is, to date, almost no respectable primary 
textual scholarship on A Course in Miracles. 
Instead there are multiple 
reproductions of historical versions with varying degrees of accuracy, all 
claiming, some quite misleadingly, to be “authentic.” 

In a nutshell, primary scholarship deals with ‘what it says” and 
secondary scholarship deal with “what it means.” Rather obviously the two 
are complementary and also rather obviously you can’t begin to analyse 
“what it means” without first knowing “what it says!” 

The four available historical Scribal Versions of A Course in Miracles 
present thousands of “variant readings.” No one has yet identified all of 
them or made a Catalogue of Variant Readings although many variants have 
been identified and studied to some extent. 
Many of the variants are 
corrections of earlier scribal errors. 
Yet other variants involve re-working 
previous material for style. 
Some involve the deletion of “too personal” 
material whose removal was directed by the “Voice.” A huge proportion, 
however, are simply inadvertent copying mistakes resulting from frequent 
recopying of the material without proofing. 
It is unlikely that the Scribes 
were even aware of most of these inadvertent errors although in some cases 


Appendix 1-28 


1876 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

they were noticed and “fixed,” but frequently not by restoring the material to 
the original, rather by “re-writing” the material to correct a grammar flaw 
resulting from the omission. 
While such editorial interventions cured the 
grammar problem, they did not restore the material to its original wording, 
and frequently they did not restore the original meaning either. 


The first task of primary scholarship for A Course in Miracles is simply 
to gather and sort and index all of the available source material and develop 
that Catalogue of Variant Readings. 
The variant readings have to be 
identified before they can be analysed. 


It seems clear that in the years of recopying and editing those involved 
were sincerely trying to “clean up” and “perfect” the material while 
preserving its “purity and integrity.” However it is difficult to avoid the 
conclusion that due to inadequate proofing, although they did in fact “fix” 
some earlier problems, they introduced even more new ones, and they were 
almost certainly unaware that they had done so in many if not most cases. 


In some cases their deletions are highly questionable and it is not always 
possible to be certain if they were intended or inadvertent. 
It is difficult to 
explain the removal of the huge section on sex and possession as 
“inadvertent.” It’s also impossible to explain the removal as “directed by the 
author” since the material is so clearly intended to be part of the Course and 
even says so explicitly. 


Each of the several versions, then, contains “correct” material not present 
in any other and no single one of them is without mistakes. 
Yet in comparing 
all of them, the mistakes tend to show up readily enough and the “original 
intended reading” is often not at all difficult to discern from among the 
variants. 
There are only a few cases where it’s not reasonably clear which of 
the available variants is the “best.” However, what is obvious to one observer 
is not always obvious to all. 
This is where “scholarly consensus” comes in. 

Various opinions may exist but as many scholars examine, study and debate 
the issues, a “consensus” usually emerges, and if not a consensus, at least a 
clear majority opinion. 


In order to produce a “consensus text” or an “eclectic version” of A 
Course in Miracles in which all of the mistakes are identified and corrected, 
and all the variants compared and analysed, it is exceedingly useful to begin 
with entirely accurate machine-readable copies of each of the versions to be 
compared. 


Of course consensus texts were being made long before there were 
computers, but computers are much more efficient at identifying small 
differences between two texts than are humans. 
We don’t yet have a single 


1877 


Appendix 1-29 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

complete collection of thoroughly proofed texts. 
From a complete and 
accurate collection of source material, a Catalogue of Variant Readings can 
be compiled, and with the help of computers, it can be compiled quite 
quickly and easily. 
It essentially involves a list of all passages for which 
there are variations between versions, and what those variations are. 
This will 
make it simple to identify all variants in the extant sources for any passage 
which does, in fact, have variants. 
And there are thousands. 


Any edition may appear as a printed book or an “e-text” edition or both. 

An “e-text” is generally a computer fde in one of several formats which can 
be searched for text strings, displayed on a computer screen, or even printed. 

This mechanical searchability is enormously useful for reference purposes 
and for scholarship. 


In the case of A Course in Miracles there are at least four “authorities” or 
“primary sources.” These are the documents in which the Scribes themselves 
had a hand. 
These are the “Scribal Versions.” These include the first print 
editions and several radically different manuscript versions, both hand and 
typewritten, some portions of which are well endowed with handwritten 
mark-up indicating editorial changes suggested some time after the document 
was first written. 
Where a typed manuscript has substantial mark-up there 
are really two versions on a single sheet of paper, the “pre-mark-up” version 
as originally typed or written by hand and the “post-mark-up” version as 
emended by the handwritten editing instructions. 
These instructions 
frequently suggest the movement of paragraph breaks and sometimes involve 
wording changes. 
The evidence suggests there have been five principal 
versions, of which copies of four are presently available. 
Each of these four 
has at least two different variants, one with and one without mark-up. 
In the 
case of the HLC the mark-up is very minor and almost entirely involves 
corrections of typos. 
There is so little it can be largely disregarded. 
In the 
case of the Urtext Workbook by contrast, the mark-up is extensive but mostly 
relates to paragraphation. 
In the case of the Nun’s Version there are multiple 
editions, each of which contains corrections of some typos in the earlier 
editions, and some which contain entirely, albeit mostly minor, original new 
variations. 
Indeed, each of the several printings of the First Edition included 
some corrections of earlier typos. 


So, within several of the “four versions” there are in fact two or more 
“sub-versions.” 

In all the primary sources there are typos, obvious spelling and 
punctuation mistakes and other inconsistencies and every editor of a new 
edition has to decide how these will be handled. 
They can be ignored, as 
would be the case in a replica edition or some of them may be corrected 


Appendix 1-30 


1878 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 

according to strict or lax editorial principles which will vary depending on 
the kind of edition being prepared. 
Alternatively, as we can see in some 
editions, editors may simply “correct” material according to subjective whim. 


One of the problems with some editions of the Course is that the 
“editorial principles” used to define errors and the methodology applied for 
correcting them appear fuzzy and are inconsistently applied. 
Part of the 
explanation for this is that many of the publications were produced by people 
with little if any publishing experience and with resources which were 
inadequate to the task. 
Brimming with “good intentions” and an eagerness to 
make the Course more available, they sometimes lacked the discipline and 
skill or simply the resources required to produce a result of consistently high 
quality. 


The early publishing history of the Bible reveals some rather similar 
problems including a lack of proof-reading. 
Often the problem is simply lack 
of resources. 
Thorough proofreading is a labour-intensive process and small 
mistakes are very easy for humans to miss. 
When dealing with a huge book 
like A Course in Miracles we are talking about many thousands of hours of 
labour to achieve “thorough proofreading.” One either has to mobilize, 
organize and train a substantial team of volunteers or one needs a budget 
adequate to hire professional proofreading services. 
Many of those involved 
in A Course In Miracles publishing since its beginnings in 1975 had neither! 

Once you set out to correct even one error, however obvious, you need 
some guidelines to determine what is an “error” and what is an intentional 
idiosyncratic wording, or even spelling. 
“Correcting obvious typos” sounds 
simple until one encounters those situations where in one opinion it is a typo 
and in another it is perceived as intentional use of an unusual grammatical or 
literary form. 
Determining just what is really an error in the original and 
what is an intentional form is by no means always simple, nor is there always 
unanimous agreement. 
Various editions reflect various different ways of 
understanding “error.” Some editions explain their guidelines and even 
document the changes they chose to make, while others make no visible 
distinction between precise replication of the original and their own editorial 
modifications. 


I can sympathize with these problems because when I first set out to 
“edit” a Course manuscript I wanted to change a great deal. 
Having worked 
as an editor I think I know what “good English” is and what “proper 
grammar” is and my instinct was to make the text I was looking at conform 
to me ideas of “good style.” 


1879 


Appendix 1-31 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


I can also empathize with Schucman’s comment “I wanted to change 
everything.” The style and structure and vocabulary in the Course is unique 
and conforms only to its own “style guide.” Anyone with editorial experience 
or inclinations is itching to use that orange editor’s pencil a great deal. 
In my 
first editing pass on the HLC for instance I had a huge list of proposed 
changes. 
As these were discussed back and forth among a number of people 
the list kept getting smaller and smaller as I became convinced that what was 
on the page, while very unusual was also usually very much intended. 


Based on comments made on the first edition of the Corrected HLC, the list 
has grown smaller still. 


Any team producing a contemporary edition of A Course in Miracles, 
then, has a lot of decisions to make and as can be seen from the great 
variation in the several editions, these can be made in a variety of different 
ways. 
Each edition reflects a particular set of ‘editorial principles’ which 
range from ‘subjective whim’ to clearly articulated and well-recognized 
standards of textual scholarship which are applied with some degree of 
rigour. 



Appendix 1-32 


PROOF 


1880 


COPY 


Appendix I: The ACIM Version/Edition Family Tree 


7. 
Publisher Contact Information 


EA 

Endeavor Academy 
501 E. 
Adams St 
Wisconsin Dells 
Wisconsin USA 53965 
Telephone: (608) 253-6898 
Fax: (608) 253-2892 

FIP 

Foundation for Inner Peace 
PO Box 598 
Mill Valley, California 
USA 94942-0598 
Email: info@acim.org 

MIAP 

Miracles in Action Press, LLC 
52 Fitzgerald Drive, 

Jaffrey, NH 03452 

URL www.miraclesinactionpress.com 

MPF (Doug Thompson) 

Miracles Pathway Fellowship 
160C Arthur St. 
N„ 

Guelph, Ontario 
Canada N1E4V5 

URL: http://www.execulink.com/~dthomp75/2008 
Telephone: 519-780-0922 
Email dthomp74@hotmail.com 

Raincoast 

Raincoast Books 
9050 Shaughnessy Street 
Vancouver, British Columbia 
Canada V6P 6E5 
Telephone: 604-323-7100 
Fax: 604-323-2600 
Email: info@raincoast.com 

Raphael Greene 

Raphael Greene 

Email: task.hope@gmail.com 

Tom Whitmore 

7602 Pacific Street, Suite 304 
Omaha, Nebraska 
USA 68114 

Telephone: 800-771-5056 

Fax: 402-391-0343 

Email: tom@whitmorelaw.com 


1881 


Appendix 1-33 





Appendix 1-34 


PROOF 


1882 


“N 


OPY 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 


Table of Contents 


1 WHAT IS THE URTEXT? .2 

2 HOW IS THE WORD URTEXT USED IN ACIM WRITINGS? .4 

3 VERSION HISTORY FROM THE FIP/WAPNICK ACCOUNT.7 

4 HOW IS THE WORD URTEXT USED ELSEWHERE?.8 

5 IS THE “ ACIM URTEXT ’ REALLY AN “URTEXT?” ... 
FIRST 

IMPRESSIONS.14 

6 WHAT DOES THE TEXTUAL EVIDENCE ITSELF TELL US?.15 

6.1 Characteristics of Visual Copying Errors: Dropping Words and 

Phrases.15 

6.2 Characteristics of Oral Errors: Wrong Word Typing Mistakes... 
18 

6.3 Idiosyncratic Errors.20 

6.4 Duplications.21 

6.5 Evidence from the Pagination.22 

6.6 Contra-indications.30 

7 CONCLUSION: THE URTEXT IS NOT ENTIRELY THE THETFORD 

TRANSCRIPT .31 

8 HOW COULD SUCH A MISTAKE BE MADE AND PERSIST?.34 

9 WHY IT IS IMPORTANT TO DETERMINE THE PROVENANCE OF 

THESE MANUSCRIPTS.36 


1883 Appendix 

PROOF COPY 
















Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 


1 What is the Urtext? 

by Doug Thompson 

Most students of A Course in Miracles have heard the story of the 
origins. 
Helen Schucman heard a “Voice” and took what she called “in¬ 
ner dictation” in her 
shorthand notebooks. 


Periodically she 
dictated those notes to 
her colleague William 
Thetford who typed 
them up, and then read 
them back to her to 
ensure accuracy. 
This 
first typed transcript 
has been referred to as 
the “’Urtext.” Later 
this first transcript was 
edited and retyped 
several times before 
the book was first 
printed. 
While the 
story was widely 
circulated, the original 
Notebooks and the 
Thetford Transcript 
were kept secret. 
The 
word “urtext” then has 
been widely un¬ 
derstood to be 
synonymous, in terms 
of the Course, with the 
term Thetford Transcript. 


When a collection of digitized photocopies of early typed manuscript 
copies of the Course labelled “ Urtext of a Course in Miracles ” surfaced 
in 2000 it was of course assumed to be that first Thetford Transcript of 
the original Shorthand Notebooks, and it was assumed to be a highly ac¬ 
curate copy of that original dictation. 



It la erode! to «ay first that thta la a raqtilrad eenrae. 


Oaly Ua Use taka tt la Talent417. 
free will doe* sat Man 
that fee aautlltt the enrrlmloa. 
Zt taaaa only that fee eaa 

aleet afcat te take chan. 
Zt la Jeat beeauaa fee are aet rea4y 
te da «t*t fee aheold aleet te de that tlae ail at a at all. 


(Toe will aea alraelea thre foer haado tare ae. 
Tee ahoeld hafts 

each dar elth the prayer "Kelp ae te perform aheierer pirealaa 
fee aeat of ae today.• ) 

1. 
lie flret thing ta reeaeher aheet alraelea la that there 
la ae order of dlfflceltf neon* then. 
Om la oat harder or hlggsr 
then aaothar. 
They are all the aaae. 


t. 
Mlrarleo do not natter. 
They are delta oolaportaat. 


3 . 
They eeeer aatarally aa aa ezpreoaloa of lore. 
The 
real alraole la the leva that laaplrea thee, la thla aeeee. 

everything that aaeas free lore la a alraole. 


a. 
Thla explains the flret point related te the lead ef 
order. 
All expreealeae af lore are aaalaal 

t 

h. 
Thla la hy the "thla* la lteelf* deea aet natter. 


The only thlac that nailer a la the dear 00. 
aad thla la far heyoad 
hnaaa aval oat loo. 


tt and h re flret 3 point a.) Q <M) Voald yen £d&»o thla 
naneiwtlei ae a hied of almalaf L Thera la nothing special 
or enrpriatng ehent thla at all. 
The on thus that happened 
ens the Onteerael airecle vee the aaperlaaee# of 11 —1 ^ 

lore that yee here felt. 
(Don't net cnherreeeed ay the Idea of 
} law. 
hkcmMMl U enly n fere ef fear, aed eetenll j a 
pcrtlwtarly 4 sage roe a fern beeenee it re fleet* egcceairtelly. 



Figure 1: The first page of the Urtext manuscript of 
the Text volume 


Appendix II - 2 1884 

PROOF 


COPY 







Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

While I think some of the Urtext material may well be that original 
Thetford Transcript, after seven years of studying it, I have gradually 
come to doubt that much of it is. 
There is considerable evidence that at 
least some of it is a later retyping. 
In this essay I shall attempt to review 
and discuss the relevant evidence which has come to my attention. 


It is the second oldest manuscript of A Course in Miracles (ACIM) 
currently available, that much is beyond dispute. 
The most widely rec¬ 
ognized authorities such as Kenneth Wapnick and Judith Skutch’s Foun¬ 
dation for Inner Peace (FIP) have repeatedly asserted that the original 
Thetford Transcript was called by the name “urtext.” 

Two serious scholarly analyses of the differences between the “ver¬ 
sions” published to date, by Robert Perry 1 and Richard Smoley, 2 have 
both accepted, without question, the identification of the Urtext as the 
Thetford Transcript. 
Neither author had access to the Notes when these 
articles were written, however. 


I am not aware of anyone - except me - who has seriously challenged 
the identification of the Urtext with the Thetford Transcript. 
On this and 
a number of other questions there has been a tendency, which I have of¬ 
ten shared, to simply accept the declarations of Wapnick and FIP as au¬ 
thoritative and not requiring corroboration. 
One reason for this has been 
the lack of access to the primary source materials without which cor¬ 
roboration is difficult. 


It was only after nearly a decade of investigation, and with enormous 
reluctance, that I finally accepted that much of the Urtext is very likely 
not the Thetford Transcript, but rather a later retyping. 


Because I am now convinced this is not the Thetford Transcript, and I 
am very aware that there is a widespread belief that it is, I feel it essen¬ 
tial to at least present the evidence which can help us correctly identify 
this significant manuscript collection. 


Within weeks of its release in August of 2000, a few questions began 
to be raised as to whether or not it really was that original Thetford Tran¬ 
script or a later, edited re-typing, or even a combination of parts of sev¬ 
eral re-typings. 
Further study cast progressively more doubt on the iden¬ 
tification of this document as the Thetford Transcript. 
The ultimate test 
is to simply compare the various documents in detail. 
Yet much of the 


1 Robert Perry: The Earlier Versions and the Editing of A Course in Miracles, Circle of 
Atonement. 
http://www.circleofa.org/articles/EarlierVersions.php 

“ Richard Smoley: A Comparison of Miracles , Fearless Press 


1885 


Appendix II - 3 



Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

primary source material was not available to scholarship. 
Since compari¬ 
sons with unavailable documents obviously couldn’t be done there was a 
widespread feeling that there was no way to tell so that Wapnick’s iden¬ 
tification simply had to be accepted. 


Now that we can compare much of it with the Notes we see that the 
Urtext is not an exact transcription of the Notes. 
Nor are many of the 
differences “inadvertent” discrepancies which could be explained as oral 
transcription errors. 
This Urtext is heavily edited in portions and a great 
deal of it shows clear, and in some cases utterly indisputable, evidence of 
being a “re-typing” with editing and sequencing changes and copying er¬ 
rors rather than an original transcript. 


2 How is the word Urtext used in ACIM 
writings? 

The source for the notion that the Urtext is the original Thetford 
Transcript is not hard to find. 
In the “Errata for the Second Edition" 3 
published by the Foundation for Inner Peace (FIP) in 1992 we read: 

“Helen took down her internal dictation in notebooks, and regularly 
dictated these to her colleague and collaborator, Dr. 
William Thetford, 
who typed out her words. 
This original typing of the three books came to 
be called the "urtext," 4 a word denoting an original manuscript.” 

Wapnick, for his part, offers a slightly more detailed set of observa¬ 
tions. 
The following quote comes from his introduction to the 32-part 
cassette tape series entitled: " Classes on the Text of A Course in Mira¬ 
cles "'. 


“Let me say a few words about the relationship of the early chapters 
of the text to what Helen had originally taken down. 
Briefly - since most 
of you know the story - Helen had written down the dictation from Jesus 
in notebooks. 
[...] She then dictated what she had written down to Bill 
Thetford, who typed it out. 
What Bill typed out is what we usually refer 
to as the urtext . 
The word "itr" comes from the biblical story of Abraham, 
who was born in Ur of the Chaldees. 
Basically it is used to symbolize the 
beginning of something, (emphasis mine) 

“So when we speak of an urtext, we mean the first version of a manu¬ 
script. 
Thus there are famous urtexts of Shakespeare's works and many 
other literary masters. 
With regard to A Course in Miracles , we used that 


3 http://www.miraclestudies.net/Errata.html (errata to the FIP Second Edition) 

4 It is interesting to note that FIP reserves the name “Urtext” for volumes 1,2, and 3 only, 
and does not include the other volumes. 



Appendix II - 4 


1886 







Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

term to denote what Bill had typed, the original typed manuscript that 
was based on Helen's notebooks. 
Helen then re-typed the manuscript of 
the text twice. 
And then there was the penultimate version, which was 
the version I saw when I met Helen and Bill. 
That is the version 5 Helen 
and I edited into the finished copy — the published copy.” 

The two primary documentary sources explicitly say the Urtext is the 
Thetford Transcript. 
Since it was Wapnick who filed the “ Urtext ” mate¬ 
rial at the copyright office, 6 it seemed to be a reasonable assumption that 
he understood what he was filing to be the Thetford Transcript. 
Wap¬ 
nick, who probably had more and better access to a vastly wider range of 
primary source material than anyone else, and who knew the Scribes and 
their work as well as anyone alive, was presumed to be “The Authority” 
on this matter. 
Indeed, it was only after the evidence of the mistake be¬ 
came overwhelming that I reluctantly concluded that, incredible as it 
might seem, Wapnick was perhaps mistaken on this point. 


The typed Urtext manuscript of the Text volume which appeared in 
2000 was obviously earlier and much larger than any version of ACIM 
then public, and it was labelled “ Urtext. 
” Naturally, given these “au¬ 
thoritative” descriptions of the Urtext from FIP and Wapnick, it was first 
assumed to be the Thetford Transcript. 


Also from the “ Errata ” we read: 

“After each of these typing sessions, Bill read back to Helen what he 
typed to ensure that no mistakes were made. 
Thus, the urtext can be con¬ 
sidered to have been carefully checked, and to be an accurate copy of 
Helen's original notes. 
Helen later re-typed the manuscript of the Text 
twice and the Workbook and Manual once, and none of these re-typings 
was [sic] ever proofread.” 

If the FIP “history” here is correct, and there is independent corrobo¬ 
ration of some key points, this is a fairly high level of “proofreading” 
and would certainly catch most inadvertent errors such as omitted words 
or phrases. 
William Thetford is on tape stating much the same thing 
about the careful proofreading. 
Schucman read her Notes to him aloud, 
he typed them up and read them back to her to ensure accuracy. 



5 http://www.miraclestudies.net/HLV.html 

6 22 Volumes of ‘‘Helen Schucman's Unpublished Writings ” were filed at the United States Copyright 
Office in 1990 by Kenneth Wapnick at the request of Helen Schucman’s husband Louis Schucman. 

That material includes eight separate manuscripts labelled “ Urtext of A course in Miracles and Related 
Material one each for the Text, Workbook, Manual, Use of Terms, Psychotherapy, Song of Prayer, 
Gifts of God and Special Messages. 



1887 


Appendix II - 5 





Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

We would therefore assume it to be accurate as Wapnick suggests. 

However, most notably in the early chapters, this Urtext is not nearly as 
accurate a copy of the Notes as we might expect from these accounts. 


To date no thorough comparison of the Notes and the Urtext has been 
done in order to completely catalogue the differences, but in the few 
chapters I’ve compared, the differences are numerous. 


We’d expect any mortal typist to make some errors, and that would 
be a reason for this proofreading, to catch and correct typing mistakes. 

We’d expect that proofreading to identify some errors which we’d see as 
pencilled-in corrections but in the Urtext documents overall there is little 
which looks like the corrections we’d expect to see from such proofread¬ 
ing. 
In marked contrast, the short Psychotherapy volume, in just 29 
pages, has several instances of precisely what we’d expect from an orally 
proofed transcript. 
In the 1072 pages of the Urtext Text volume, there is 
proportionately much less of this sort of editing. 


While FIP and Wapnick disagree on the number of retypings, they 
both agree there were at least two typed manuscripts made, the original 
Thetford Transcript and one or more retypings of it, for every volume, 
with the Text having at least one more than the other volumes. 
The 
“other volumes” here may relate only to the Workbook, Manual for 
Teachers, and possibly the Use of Terms. 
So far, however, we only have 
a single typed manuscript earlier than the HLC for a total of two for the 
Text and only a single pre-1975 typed manuscript for the other volumes. 

These are the ones from 22 Volumes material labelled “ Urtext .” 

So our sources say two or more typed manuscript copies of the 
Course were made. 
What we have here labelled “urtext” is a typed copy 
of the Notes with some material added, some material omitted, and some 
material re-sequenced. 
It is almost certainly one of the several early 
typed copies, but which one? 


Appendix II - 6 


1888 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 


3 Version History from the FlP/Wapnick 
account 

While FIP seems to indicate that the HLC may be the second re¬ 
typing, from Wapnick’s descriptions the Text “version history” includes 
six versions: 

1. 
Notes 

2. 
Thetford Transcript (mistakenly called the Urtext ?) 

3. 
First Re-typing (which may actually be the Urtext ?) 

4. 
Second Re-typing (this may be a ghost and refer to the 

HLC!) 

5. 
HLC 

6. 
Criswell/FIP Editions 

What we actually have copies of for the Text is only four. 


1. 
Notes 

2. 
Urtext (likely one of the re-typings) 

3. 
HLC 

4. 
Criswell/FIP Editions 

From both the FIP and Wapnick descriptions, the other volumes “ver¬ 
sion history” involves four versions: 

1. 
Notes 

2. 
Thetford Transcript (which they called Urtext?) 

3. 
First_Re-typing (which more likely is the Urtext?) 

4. 
Criswell/FIP First Edition 

What we actually have copies of for the other volumes is only three : 

1. 
Notes 

2. 
Urtext (we can’t be entirely certain which re-typing it is. 

Some portions may be the Thetford Transcript) 

3. 
Criswell/FIP 

Wapnick and FIP disagree on the number of additional retypings, but 
agree that there was more than one. 
The physical evidence appears to 
support their assertion that more exist than have so far come to light. 

There certainly is physical evidence of another retyping for the Text and 
in the extant Urtext we can see that some sections appear to have been 
re-worked multiple times while other sections appear exactly as they do 


1889 


Appendix II - 7 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

in the Notes. 
It would appear that some portions were more heavily ed¬ 
ited, and perhaps more frequently re-typed, than other segments. 
There 
thus may be (or at one time may have been) several partial retypings re¬ 
flecting different stages of editing, or different versions, for some por¬ 
tions of the Course. 


In any event, if the FIP and Wapnick reports of multiple complete or 
even partial retypings are correct, and I know of no evidence to suggest 
they are not, the question arises as to which of those multiple retypings 
the manuscripts labelled “urtext” represent. 
Are they the original typed 
transcripts or a later re-typed copy, or a combination of two or more 
originally distinct manuscripts, or even something else entirely? 

Wapnick and the FIP Errata to the Second Edition were really the 
only published sources from which we could assess what this u Urtext” 
material in the 22 Volumes was. 
While they disagree on a key point, that 
being how many retypings there were in total, they agree on what an 
“urtext” is. 
On this point however, it would seem that they may both be 
mistaken. 


Wapnick said: “The word ‘ur’ comes from the Biblical story of Abra¬ 
ham, who was born in Ur of the Chaldees. 
Basically it is used to symbol¬ 
ize the beginning of something.” He also says “urtext” is “a word denot¬ 
ing an original manuscript.” 

Every dictionary consulted, along with several encyclopaedias state 
that the term “urtext” derives from the German word “ur” (pronounced 
“oor”) which means “original.” It has nothing to do with Ur of the 
Chaldees or Abraham. 
As for “denoting an original manuscript” well ... 

not exactly and certainly not necessarily. 


4 How is the word Urtext used elsewhere? 

While dictionaries generally indicate that “ur” means “original” and 
“urtext” means “original text” this in no way means that “urtext” means 
the author’s original autograph or any precise copy of it. 
It must be 
noted that it is easy to assume from such a brief dictionary definition that 
this is exactly what it means, and that may explain part of how the word 
“urtext” became connected with the Thetford Transcript. 


If “urtext is taken to mean “original manuscript,” the Notes would 
have to be considered “the urtext” since they are the original. 
A pre¬ 
cisely accurate typed transcript could be considered the “same thing” or 
an “urtext transcript” but any subsequent edited version could not be 
considered “an urtext.” Yet, when we find “urtext versions” of musical 


Appendix II - 8 


1890 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

scores being published, they are neither “original manuscripts” nor pre¬ 
cise copies of original autographs. 


This is crucial to our understanding of the ACIM Urtext. 
In fact, as 
we shall see, the word “urtext” is far from precise and may refer to a va¬ 
riety of “earlier” things, but only rarely to “original autographs” or exact 
typed copies of them. 


The most common usage of the word “urtext” seems largely, but not 
entirely, confined to classical musical scores. 
It comes from the German 
root for “original,” “source,” or “earlier.” It is a prefix, much like “pre” 
in English. 
This meaning is not drawn from a dictionary, but from con¬ 
sultation with native German speakers who insist it may mean “original” 
or “earliest” but also may more generally mean “previous” or “earlier” - 
in short it is a relative, not a superlative term. 
Something may be both 
“earlier” than something else and also, but not necessarily, the “earliest.” 

There is more evidence that it is not necessarily a superlative term. 
In 
the Britannica definition (below) it is described as something “pieced 
together” from earlier sources with the intent to reflect the “original” 
meaning, but that is quite different from “the original autograph” or “ear¬ 
liest primary source.” 

In fact there seems little difference between the meaning of the term 
“Critical Edition” as applied to a literary work and “urtext” as applied to 
a musical score in that they share the overall intent to reconstruct or 
“piece together,” as Britannica puts it, the “original intent” as closely as 
possible from extant primary sources. 


In that sense of being a scholarly work piecing together primary 
sources, far from being the most primary source of all, which is the con¬ 
notation of the word “original,” it would in fact be a secondary source 
derived from primary sources, albeit with the intent to reflect an original 
document or at least the author’s original intent which was presumed to 
have existed, at least hypothetically. 


I say “hypothetically” because while the author of any work may be 
presumed to have had “an intent” which is at least theoretically know- 
able, no single one of that author’s written drafts may actually represent 
it entirely. 
But, in sorting through the available evidence with the aim of 
representing that author’s original intent, the result is called an “urtext.” 
In short, it represents the opinion as to the author’s original intent of 
those who pieced it together by examining all relevant documents rather 
than the “author’s original statement” in any particular document. 



1891 


Appendix II - 9 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

This is a crucial, if subtle, distinction. 
By this definition the Thetford 
Transcript and the Notes would not be considered “urtexts.” However, 
the document we refer to as the Urtext appears to genuinely be a “pieced 
together” urtext. 


The document known as the ACIM Urtext , whatever it is, is not a pre¬ 
cise copy of the Notes. 
It has many differences beyond what can be ex¬ 
plained as copying errors. 
It shows clear signs of editing and many signs 
of visual copying errors and other evidence of retyping, but rather little 
sign of “oral errors” except in the Psychotherapy volume. 


Yet it may well be the result of the Scribes “piecing together” earlier 
hand and typewritten drafts to reflect their idea of the author’s original 
intent. 
In fact, that is exactly what it looks like! If it is that then it is pre¬ 
cisely and exactly an “urtext” of the “pieced together” sort. 
But it’s nei¬ 
ther the Thetford Transcript, nor a precise typed transcript of the “origi¬ 
nal autograph” which is the Notes. 


The Britannica definition (below) is also quick to point out that 
“urtext” does not necessarily mean “original autograph” but “may lead 
the uninitiated to suppose” that it does! 

This came as quite a shock to me and I expect many others will be 
very surprised also. 
Before I read Wapnick I’d never encountered the 
term “urtext” and like many I simply assumed he knew what he was 
talking about and I didn’t question either his definition or his statement 
that the Urtext was the Thetford Transcript. 
I’ve learned many times 
that one must be careful of assumptions in this field. 
Many well- 
meaning people have passed on their untested assumptions, perhaps in 
good faith, but sincere good faith does not always equal accuracy. 


From Britannica: 

“The word Urtext (“original text”) may lead the uninitiated to sup¬ 
pose that they are being offered an exact reproduction of what Bach 
wrote. 
It must be understood that the autographs of many important 
works no longer exist. 
Therefore, Bach's intentions often have to be 
pieced together from anything up to 20 sources, all different. 
Even first 
editions and facsimiles of autograph manuscripts are not infallible guides 
to Bach's intentions. 
In fact, they are often dangerously misleading, and 
practical musicians should take expert advice before consulting them. 


II 

While the primary use of the term appears to be for a kind of schol¬ 
arly reconstruction of classical musical scores, some sources allow for its 
use on “a musical sore or a literary work .” 

1892 


Appendix II -10 



Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

From Encarta: 

“Urtext (German for “original text”), edition of music that tries to 
capture the original intentions of the composer and minimizes editorial 
interpretation as much as possible. 
Urtext editions are usually based 
upon the composer’s sketches and manuscripts, as well as original and 
early editions of the works.” 

From Wikipedia: 

“An urtext edition of a work of classical music is a printed version in¬ 
tended to reproduce the original intention of the composer as exactly as 
possible, without any added or changed material. 
Other kinds of editions 
distinct from urtext are facsimile and interpretive editions [...]. 


“The word "urtext" is of German origin; "ur-" means "original". 
Oc¬ 
casionally the word "urtext" is capitalized, following German spelling 
practice.” 

From Oxford Literary Dictionary: 

“Urtext, the German term for an original version of a text, usually ap¬ 
plied to a version that is lost and so has to be reconstructed by textual 
criticism. 
Some scholars believe that Shakespeare's Hamlet is based on 
an earlier play that has not survived even in name; this hypothetical work 
is referred to as the Ur-Hamlet.” 

On that note, Henning Diedrich observes “there is the Ur-Faust, 
which is a proper, valid play on its own. 
There is Faust /, Faust II, and 
Ur-Faust. 
Ur-Faust was written decades earlier, probably never pub¬ 
lished, and was prose, as opposed to the verses of Faust I and II.” 

In this later sense of “ur” the German word’s connotation of original, 
early document is clearly dominant. 
The ‘’‘’Ur-Hamlet" and “ Ur-Faust ” 
however do not really refer to “urtexts” (pieced together reconstructions) 
of either Hamlet or Faustl The meaning of “ Ur-Hamlet ’’ isn’t “the first 
text (original copy) of Hamlet ” so much as it is “the first Hamlet ” or 
even “the literary origin or basis for Hamlet” which is something rather 
different. 
This is neither an “original autograph” nor a “pieced together” 
secondary work, so much as an earlier, previous, and even hypothetical 
precursor or prototype. 


The difference is subtle but crucial. 
Assuming we had the first and 
original autographs of both Hamlet and Ur-Hamlet, we’d find them dif¬ 
ferent, even if one was based on the other. 
And we could do an “urtext” 
(of the pieced together sort) of Ur-Hamlet as well as an “urtext” of Ham¬ 
let, if we had enough source material to work with. 



1893 


Appendix II -11 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

Similarly with Ur-Faust... 
it’s not the same play as Faust I and we 
could presumably do an “urtext” for each play. 


There are then these two somewhat divergent connotations to the 
German prefix “ur.” Both relate to “originality” but in the first case the 
reference is to the scholarly reconstruction, through textual criticism, of 
something that is lost or never actually existed. 
The second refers to an 
earlier, more ‘original’ draft or version which may or may not still exist. 


It’s not a common word, it is not present in many dictionaries, so it is 
not surprising perhaps that Wapnick thought it might have to do with 
Abraham. 
Like me, he may have never heard the word before coming in 
contact with ACIM and like me he may have made assumptions about 
what it meant without checking. 


Assuming for many years that Wapnick’s definition was correct, the 
steadily increasing evidence that much of the “urtext” material in the 22 
Volumes was not the Thetford Transcript left me more and more puz¬ 
zled. 
I was simply unprepared to accept there could be an error at this 
level for some years. 
I concede that it seem s very unlikely and I fully 
expect there will be widespread scepticism of this hypothesis. 


It seems possible the mistake was simply in the definition of the word 
“urtext.” The word is sufficiently uncommon, imprecise and subject to 
variable usage that such a mistake is very understandable. 
I made it my¬ 
self. 
That mistake was not recognized and corrected perhaps because 
they never checked. 
I can understand that also. 
It was only very re¬ 
cently that I began to suspect the word did not mean “autograph” and 
began to seriously check. 


Getting the definition of a word wrong is one thing. 
Being unaware 
that the “urtext” was not in fact the Thetford Transcript while telling 
people for years that it was is a little more amazing. 
How could they 
have not known? Could it be that they never seriously checked that and 
several other assumptions they made and repeated, perhaps even in good 
faith, but without verifying them? Could it be that the actual Thetford 
Transcript no longer exists? Whatever misunderstandings of the defini¬ 
tions of unusual words might occur, it strikes me as highly improbable 
that one could fail to notice a difference between that original transcript 
and an urtext derived in part from it if one had both in one’s hands. 


In summary then, here’s our problem: there is a “story” about the ori¬ 
gins of the Course which comes from people who are in a position to 
know. 
So we believe it, having no reason not to, and besides it’s not 
easy to check that story due to the fact that the documentary sources by 


Appendix II -12 


1894 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

which it could be checked are not available. 
As the documentary 
sources become available, we use the “story” to identify the documents 
but as we study the documents, various elements of the “story” are called 
into question. 
The origins of the word “urtext” with Abraham is simply 
not correct. 
The definition of the term “urtext” is not necessarily correct. 

The identification of the Urtext manuscript as the Thetford Transcript is 
almost certainly not entirely correct at least. 
And our two sources dis¬ 
agree with each other as to the number of retypings. 


“The Authorities” on these matters appear less reliable than we’d 
like. 
This doesn’t mean the rest of their information is incorrect, but it 
does remind us that anyone can err and verification is required. 



PROOF 


1895 


COPY 


Appendix 11-13 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 


5 Is the “ACIM Urtext ” really an “urtext?” ... 

first impressions 

Now Helen Schucman, who had some familiarity with classical music 
and might well have been familiar with precisely what an “urtext” is in 
that field, may well have adopted that word since it loosely described 
what she and Thetford had done with the “primary sources” which were 
her Notes and his Transcript as they edited those into a manuscript 
which I strongly suspect is in fact what we are referring to here by the 
name Urtext. 
They had corrected some typos in the earlier material, 
added to them segments “dictated without notes” and applied some of 
the corrections the Author had dictated. 
In short, the ACIM Urtext is, ac¬ 
tually, an “urtext” in the “pieced together” meaning of the word, insofar 
as a term derived from music publishing can be applied to literature. 
Its 
use in literature is uncommon but not unprecedented. 
The American 
Heritage Dictionary does allow that while it normally applies to musical 
composition it can be used to refer to a “literary work.” 

When you look at the ACIM Urtext the expression “piecing together” 
immediately comes to mind. 
It is obviously assembled from bits and 
pieces of several different drafts, it has multiple internal pagination sys¬ 
tems, was typed on at least two different typewriters, contains some du¬ 
plication, and even has some pages marked “re-typed,” rather proving it 
wasn’t a “single typing.” It includes material not in the Notes while 
omitting some material that is in the Notes. 
While this is not wholly 
conclusive by itself, it does raise doubts about this being the Thetford 
Transcript. 


Now if we had a document typed up by Thetford, incrementally day 
by day, simply copying down what Schucman dictated from her Notes, 
we’d not expect to see such “piecing together.” Sure, some anomalies 
might arise from any number of causes, and Thetford may have re-typed 
the occasional page, but we aren’t seeing anomalies within a document 
that looks like what we’d expect, the whole thing is anomalous, and little 
of it, aside from the Psychotherapy volume, looks like it is a document 
dictated orally, and then orally proofed. 


It looks just like an “urtext” based on visually copying without proof¬ 
reading, which we are told is how the first retyping came into being. 


So let’s probe the evidence further. 



Appendix II -14 


1896 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 


6 What does the textual evidence itself tell 
us? 

Aside from the fact that it doesn’t look like an orally dictated tran¬ 
script, or what we’d expect to see in such a transcript, is there any other 
evidence? What it “looks like” and that “it looks all wrong” may raise 
questions but questions are not proof. 


6.1 Characteristics of Visual Copying Errors: Dropping 
Words and Phrases 

When one makes a copy by typing by eye one typically makes differ¬ 
ent errors than one makes when typing from oral dictation. 
I worked for 
years as a newspaper typesetter, where much of the work in the shop in¬ 
volved copy-typists manually copying typed and handwritten paper 
documents. 
It’s the same kind of technology I presume Schucman had 
available for her “re-typing” work on ACIM. 
The typist sits at a key¬ 
board (typewriter or typesetting machine, the latter is just a more sophis¬ 
ticated typewriter) with a “copy stand” on which sits the paper “origi¬ 
nal.” At the newspaper the “original” is generally the reporter’s typed 
story as marked up and “edited” by the editor. 
The copy-typist reads it 
and types what the reporter wrote as adjusted by the editor. 
Secretaries 
in office typing pools and typesetters in publishing firms were doing vast 
amounts of that labour-intensive copy-typing all over the world until 
computers and scanners and OCR technology almost entirely replaced 
that copy-typing activity in the past two decades. 
Now reporters type 
into computer files instead of onto paper and editors simply modify the 
reporter’s file on screen and send it straight to production, with no re¬ 
typing required. 
There’s a huge saving in labour and a huge reduction in 
“copying mistakes.” 

There are a number of exceedingly co mm on mistakes when humans 
copy type by eye, and they show up frequently in the ACIM manuscripts. 

I saw these every day for years in the typesetting shop which is why I 
noticed them immediately. 
It is very easy to leave out words and phrases 
and even sentences and whole paragraphs. 
This is especially the case 
when there are two instances of the same word in close proximity. 
If, 
when the words between those two instances are left out, the result is 
still grammatically and factually correct, as is often the case, it’s far from 
obvious that a mistake has been made at all. 
It’s difficult from reading 
the result to notice the omission. 
There are many instances of this in 


1897 


Appendix 11-15 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

ACIM from version to version, and this is utterly typical of the most 
common of visual copy-typing errors. 


This does not mean that every omission is an “error.” Some may well 
be intentional. 
Very few of the omissions appear to be intentional how¬ 
ever. 


I’ll cite just one of many hundreds of examples where a line is left 
out, almost certainly unintentionally, while visually copy-typing. 
This is 
from the Text chapter 2. 
The Urtext reads: 

“T 2 C 8 The body, if properly understood, shares the invulnerability 
of the Atonement to two-edged application. 
This is not because the 
body is a miracle, but because it is not inherently open to misinterpre¬ 
tation. 
The body is merely a fact. 
Its ABILITIES can be, and fre¬ 
quently are, overevaluated. 
However, it is almost impossible to deny 
its existence. 
Those who do are engaging in a particularly unworthy 
form of denial. 
(The use of the word "unworthy" here implies simply 
that it is not necessary to protect the mind by denying the un-mindful. 

There is little doubt that the mind can miscreate. 
If one denies this 
unfortunate aspect of its power, one is also denying the power itself.)” 

The emphasized line does not appear in the HLC or the later FIP edi¬ 
tions. 
It is, however, in both the Notes and the Urtext. 
Without that sen¬ 
tence, the antecedent for “this unfortunate aspect” in the last sentence is 
gone, rendering it meaningless. 
What then does “this unfortunate as¬ 
pect” refer to? The “unfortunate aspect” is, of course, the mind’s ability 
to miscreate. 


This is a classic example of an “inadvertent omission” copy-typing 
mistake. 
Usually, when the effect of an omission is to leave the follow¬ 
ing sentence incoherent, as in this case, it gets caught. 
I am quite sur¬ 
prised this one didn’t get caught. 


In the case of the Urtext to the HLC we presume it was visually re¬ 
typed and we see hundreds of these small omissions. 
They are entirely 
predictable in human copy-typing which has not been proofed but very 
rare in proofed material. 
In the Urtext when compared to the Notes we 
see the same pattern of numerous, and usually small omissions which do 
not appear to be intentional. 


One of the many omissions of Notes material in the Urtext typical of 
copying by eye is found in chapter 16 of the Text, in the first paragraph. 

Both the original Notes and the partly proofed FIP Second Edition in¬ 
clude as the fourth sentence of that paragraph “His way is very differ¬ 
ent.” It’s underlined in the Notes. 
Neither the “ Urtext ” manuscript nor 


Appendix 11-16 


1898 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

the HLC manuscripts include this sentence, nor does the FIP First Edi¬ 
tion. 


That’s not the kind of error we get when typing to oral dictation and 
then proofing it by reading it back! First, such omissions which are a 
kind of optical illusion are much less likely when typing to oral dictation 
that is pacing itself to your typing speed. 
We used to do that sometimes 
in newspapers too. 
Reporters who could not physically transport a typed 
story on paper back to the office in time would “phone it in” and some¬ 
one at the office, sometimes me, would type what the reporter read over 
the phone, and then of course read it back to him to ensure accuracy. 


That “reading it back” will almost always catch missing words and 
phrases. 
The kind of errors we get with oral dictation involve words 
which sound similar and whose substitution sounds plausible. 
Obvious 
errors can still occur because they aren’t obvious until the sentence or 
paragraph is complete, but they get caught, crossed out, and the correct 
word is typed or handwritten in. 


There actually are a few of these in the Text which may stem from the 
original oral dictation and which never got caught. 
But there aren’t 
many. 
It’s also possible to mistype when copying by eye such that the 
resulting word is wrong, but still makes sense and sounds similar. 
The 
Psychotherapy volume is a complete contrast to the Text volume. 
We 
see several “oral” errors, sound alike words being substituted, crossed 
out, with the correct word handwritten in, which is precisely what we’d 
expect in pages typed from oral dictation. 
It is both the presence of these 
in that volume which leads to its tentative identification as, in fact, the 
Thetford Transcript and the absence of them elsewhere in the Urtext 
manuscripts which raises doubts about those other volumes being the 
Thetford Transcript. 
From what we’ve been told about the process of 
transcribing, such mistakes should be present and should be corrected. 


In fact they simply aren’t there in the numbers expected, except in Psy¬ 
chotherapy and to a lesser extent in Song of Prayer. 


In this example and most of the many other cases, deliberate omission 
appears unlikely as one can see no reason to suppose the words were not 
authentic or would otherwise be disagreeable to the Scribes. 


While any particular mistake could have been made by anyone for 
any number of reasons and by itself proves nothing, a pattern of mis¬ 
takes is powerful evidence, though it may well still fall short of being 
conclusive proof. 
The examples I’ve cited are typical, and there are hun¬ 
dreds of the same sort. 
Were there only one or two, I’d say it wouldn’t 


1899 


Appendix 11-17 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

mean much. 
Where one sees the same pattern time and again, it be¬ 
comes strongly suggestive, just as where one fails to see a pattern that 
should be there. 


6.2 Characteristics of Oral Errors: Wrong Word Typing 
Mistakes 

Because I’ve done a lot of it, I have a sense of the kinds of errors 
which occur when typing to oral dictation. 
I’d say that almost any kind 
of mistake can occur. 
But when you read it back, most get noticed and 
corrected. 
Typing to oral dictation, even for a good typist, means nu¬ 
merous errors which of course are easy to fix and make vanish on a 
computer, but when typing onto paper, they leave visible traces on that 
original copy, no matter how you correct them. 
They might be corrected 
with handwriting or with overstriking, as might any errors, but you’d ex¬ 
pect a much higher rate of error and you’d also expect any errors to be 
caught in the oral proofing, except possibly for ones that you can’t hear. 


Since we have reason to believe that Schucman typed the HLC we 
can see she was an excellent typist. 
Her error rate is very low. 
There are 
very few typos. 
Her typing is clean and largely error free. 
Yet in the 
Urtext we do see some pages which don’t reflect such clean typing and 
which do include a lot of mistakes that were fixed, most notably in the 
Psychotherapy pamphlet. 








uiLiin rrn uuiumn uuri' 

C“* ^ ^ 1 > >4 A 1 ^ 

i Xx fcj » j 



Figure 2 Psychotherapy 3 E from the Notes. 





and j<Iy sine* H stales daformlty. 
If a daforaltjr la aaea aa real, vbat tould lta 

abadov &• axe apt aa faaarf At p? o“ * • 


Figure 3 the same words as in figure 2 from the Urtext manuscript 


For example, there is one on the first page of Psychotherapy where 
we find “Light” and we see “Life” written in, and it does not appear to 
me to be Schucman’s handwriting. 
“Light” and “Life” sound enough 
alike that when either “makes sense” in the context, it is an easy “hearing 
error” to make but one which could well be caught in the proofing. 
This 
one, it seems, was caught. 



1900 


Appendix II -18 







Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

Another example appears on page 9 of Psychotherapy. 
Figures 2 and 
3 show the two lines in question, bottom of the second paragraph of sec¬ 
tion 3 E, The Process of Illness. 


If you look closely (Fig. 
3) you see that the last words were initially 
typed “ shadow be except the form” That’s very typical of an “oral” er¬ 
ror, “the form ” and “ deformed ” sound very similar. 
The result makes 
grammatical and logical sense, so it could easily be missed. 
It is very 
unlikely that kind of mistake would be made by visual copying, how¬ 
ever, since the two forms do not look at all alike. 
The Notes reads 
“shadow be except deformed?” This is exactly the kind of mistake we’d 
expect to find in oral dictation that had been proofed. 
We’d expect it 
and in Psychotherapy, we see it, and we see it several times in a mere 29 
pages! However, this kind of mistake and correction is very rare in the 
Text volume. 
This kind of error would of course be caught usually and 
would not often survive into a visually re-typed copy. 
Interestingly, how¬ 
ever, the handwriting is obviously that of the same person, presumably 
Schucman. 
And that is not what we’d expect to see if Thetford is read¬ 
ing to her what he had just typed and marking corrections himself. 
Pos¬ 
sibly this mistake was not detected in their oral proofing but was caught 
by Schucman later. 
We may never know for sure. 


Another example of typical “oral mistakes” occurs on page 10 of the 
typed Psychotherapy manuscript, (see Figure 4) We see “illness lies in¬ 
stead” being corrected to “illness rise instead.” That is what is in the 
Notes. 
But again “rise” and “lies” sound very much alike. 
These are 
typical of the sort of hearing errors which we’d expect of a manuscript 
typed to oral dictation. 


is a meaningful concept* Yet must their cures remain tenpor ary, or another illness 

l ies instead, for death has not been overcome until the meaning of love is understood. 


by 

And who can understand this without the Word of God, given ±m Him to the Holy Spirit 

as His gift to you? 

Figure 4 In the second line "lies" is crossed out and becomes "rise" in the Psychotherapy 
manuscript which is characteristic of a hearing error rather than a visual copying error.. 


Their presence here in the Psychotherapy manuscript is strongly sug¬ 
gestive that this may indeed be the Thetford Transcript and not a later re¬ 
typing. 
The fact that such mistakes, common in this document, are very 
rare in the Urtext Text volume would seem to indicate it is what it ap¬ 
pears to be, a later re-typing and not the original Thetford Transcript. 


Those are just three examples. 
We even find corrections written into the 


1901 


Appendix 11-19 



Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

Notes, such as exchanging “seek” for “find” also written into the Psycho¬ 
therapy manuscript which suggests the “correction” was made in both at 
the same time. 
Unless this typed manuscript was proofed against the 
Notes later, it is hard to explain how the same handwritten correction 
would occur in both documents. 
It could well have been done during the 
initial transcription as Schucman decided a change was needed after she 
dictated the word, and then made it in both her Notes and the transcript. 

It’s very rare that we find editing changes in the typed manuscript re¬ 
flected in the Notes that way. 
Of course it is difficult to be certain, but 
this is plausible and might well be expected in oral dictation and proof¬ 
ing, that Schucman would decide to introduce a change after first dictat¬ 
ing it, while hearing it read back. 


I’ve only noticed one other example of visible editing on a typed page 
being reflected in visible editing on a page of the Notes. 
That is actually 
in the Text volume. 
There may be others but they certainly are not com¬ 
mon. 
The vast majority of editing we see on the typed manuscripts does 
not show up in the Notes. 
A possible explanation is that it was done 
some time later, during or after a re-typing. 
What we don’t find here that 
we do find in the Text is numerous dropped words and phrases. 
The cor¬ 
respondence, word for word, comma for comma, between the typed 
manuscript of Psychotherapy and the Notes is higher than the average 
for the other typed manuscripts. 


These, I submit, are powerful indicators which help us distinguish 
documents which have been copied “by ear” from the spoken word and 
documents which have been copied “by eye” from the written word. 


6.3 Idiosyncratic Errors 

Thetford described how he made certain typical typing errors, such 
as typing “bother” instead of “brother” and “slavation’ instead of 
“salvation” and “crucifiction” instead of “crucifixion.” Only in the 
Psychotherapy pamphlet have I found any of those “ideosyncratic 
errors.” There are none in the rest of the Urtext material that I’ve 
spotted. 
Their absence in other volumes of the Urtext suggests a re¬ 
typed copy in which those sorts of errors were, of course, corrected. 


This is perhaps the most powerful evidence that in the Urtext we aren’t 
looking at Thetford’s original typing but at a re-typing with some 
editing, at least to the extent of fixing his spelling mistakes. 
There are 
two explanations for the lack of the patterns of idiosyncratic errors 
Thetford said were there: either this isn’t the document he typed with 


1902 


Appendix II - 20 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

those errors or he just made the story up. 
The latter seems extremely 
unlikely. 
The former is consistent with most of the other evidence. 


6.4 Duplications 

In the Urtext manuscript we find several instances where the same 
material is typed twice, not duplicate photocopies of the same page, but 
the same words typed on different typewriters, or with different line end- 
it unto yourself. 
For your Father wills you to know your brother AS your¬ 
self. 
Answer HIS call for love, and TOURS is answered. 
Healing is the 
love of Christ for His Father, and for HIMSELF. 



Figure 5 Bottom of Urtext 454 



ings or on different parts of the page, but otherwise exactly the same 
words. 
Where the page beginning and ending are the same, this indicates 
that to some extent at least, this document is a combination of at least 
two distinct typed documents, and some of the material, at least, is re¬ 
typed and is not the “original” typed transcript. 
Where the duplication 
involves shifting page breaks, as in the example in figures 5 and 6, we 
see evidence which is more consistent with visual re-typing than with 
oral transcribing. 


For instance, to pick just one of many examples, if we look at the bot¬ 
tom of page 454 and the top of page 455 (marked 281-282) we see the 
last two sentences of page 454 repeated on 455 and then crossed out by 
hand, (see figures 5 and 6) 

It is perhaps impossible to be entirely sure of what has happened 
here, but it seems unlikely we’d see Thetford, while listening to 
Schucman read from the Notes, pause to change paper and then resume 
typing on a new page 18 words before where he’d stopped on the previ¬ 
ous page, in the middle of a sentence! This sort of error appears much 
more consistent with visual re-typing than aural transcription. 


It is quite possible that in re-typing, the typist got an extra two lines 
on the page such that the new page finished 18 words later than the page 


1903 


Appendix 11-21 




Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

being copied. 
Then, perhaps having been distracted, when resuming typ¬ 
ing on the next page the copyist began where the next page began, 18 
words before where she’d left off previously. 
Later, this was noticed and 
the extra words were crossed out. 


And in case you were wondering, the Notes (8:144-145) page break 
doesn’t occur between “His call” and “for love” but actually a few words 
later, between “is” and “answered.” Note that in the first copy on page 
454, the word “is” is misspelled as “in.” This is another sign of visual 
rather than aural copying. 
It also suggests a tired or distracted copy- 
typist. 


It is also interesting to note that while the first two lines on p 282 (fig. 

6) are the same as the last two on the previous page, there is one small 
difference. 
In the first, (fig. 
5) there is a comma after “Father” which is 
not there in the second copy. 
This is illustrative of a general pattern seen 
where we have multiple typed copies: there are generally numerous 
small differences of this sort. 


This isn’t certain proof due to the fact that anyone can make almost 
any sort of error for almost any reason now and then. 
We weren’t there 
at the time and cannot be entirely sure how any particular error arose. 

This is just one of many indications that we are dealing with a re-typed 
copy and not an original typed manuscript, however. 


One or two such indications here and there are certainly not conclu¬ 
sive, but when we have a consistent pattern involving hundreds, the 
weight of “suggestive” evidence begins to add up to “conclusive proof.” 

The “error pattern” is consistent with visual copy-typing which was 
not proofed, and not aural transcription which was subsequently proofed. 


6.5 Evidence from the Pagination 

Further evidence lies in the pagination. 
It is important to note that my 
observations here are not based on any attempt at a thorough analysis of 
the pagination anomalies. 
It is the fact of the anomalies and the patterns 
I have noticed which are directly relevant. 
I strongly suspect that a very 
careful analysis of the pagination issues might yield significant new in¬ 
sights into the process by which the Text volume was created. 


In the first 382 pages many pages bear at least two and often more 
page numbers, with all but one crossed out. 


After page 84 the number marked on the page does not correspond 
exactly to the actual page number. 
The page numbering in the Text vol¬ 
ume up to approximately the end of chapter 8 is utterly chaotic, starting, 


Appendix II - 22 


1904 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

stopping, and restarting, with some pages having as many as four differ¬ 
ent numbers written, then crossed out. 
At the 174 th page the numbering 
restarts at “1” and at the end of chapter 8, 382 pages from the start, the 
page is marked 209 and from that point to the end the numbering contin¬ 
ues with substantial consistency and few multiple page numbers. 


There are a few pagination anomalies in the latter three quarters of 
the manuscript. 
In chapter 18, section H, we have three pages of later 
material inserted out of chronological sequence to reflect the HLC order¬ 
ing. 
It should be noted that this particular anomaly reflects the HLC ed¬ 
iting and my attempt to match the Urtext manuscript page order to that 
of the HLC for the purpose of aligning chapter and section divisions 
identically between the two. 
Those three pages are part of the Special 
Messages material but bear page numbers and dates which would put 
them between 22 F and 22 G. 
This is not, then, an anomaly in the Urtext 
manuscript proper. 
This reflects subsequent scribal editing which relo¬ 
cated these three pages from their original sequence. 
The Scribes ended 
up including this material where we do in later editing, apparently ac¬ 
cepting it as a “dictated correction” or “expansion” of earlier material. 


In chapter 20 we have page 567a between 567 and 568 (absolute page 
number 744) and we have the page marked 583a between 583 and 584 
(absolute page number 761). 
In chapter 21 we have 596a (absolute page 
775). 
In chapter 22 we have 617a (797). 
Further study is required to 
begin to guess exactly why the Scribes needed to number some pages as 
“a” rather than assign a new page number but this may indicate pagina¬ 
tion variation between an earlier copy and a new copy being made which 
required the insertion of extra pages. 
It may also indicate later insertion 
of material. 


In chapter 26 Section F we have the page marked 732 followed by 
740 with page numbers 733-739 (913-914) missing. 
Flowever, there is 
no other indication of missing material here. 
The text across the “miss¬ 
ing page numbers” is identical in the Notes. 
The anomaly here appears 
to be only in the page numbering. 
At page 731 (912) we also have an 
obvious change in typewriter from elite to pica. 
These clues suggest that 
possibly one segment is a later copy than the other. 


In chapter 29 section E the marked pagination goes from 824 (998) 
back to 813 (999), reusing the page numbers 813-824. 
This sort of thing 
could happen if two or more “versions” whose pagination was slightly 
different due to editing or the use of different typewriters and margins 
were being combined later. 



1905 


Appendix II - 23 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

Careful study of these numbering anomalies and other physical clues 
such as changing typewriters may allow us to ultimately surmise more 
about the pattern of copying and recopying here. 
We can for instance 
easily discern at least two different typewriters being used and that may 
turn out to be an important clue as to the “generation” in copying. 
It 
may be that the shift from one typewriter to another happened at a cer¬ 
tain point in time and that the relative age of the page may be indicated 
by which typewriter was used. 
It’s also possible that Thetford used a 
different typewriter than Schucman did. 
Further study will be needed to 
determine if those hunches have any merit. 
If they do, we may be able 
to discern a great deal more about the actual creation of these physical 
pages in terms of when it was done and by whom. 


The numbering anomalies in the last three quarters of the Text may 
appear numerous when listed here but are fewer than those in the first 
one quarter where there are too many to list. 


In that latter section we also see very little handwritten mark-up. 
The 
page marked 209 is actually the 382nd page of the Text volume! From 
page 209 to the end, page 886, which is actually the 1072nd page of the 
Urtext manuscript, the numbers also very closely approximate those of 
the later HLC version. 
The material on page 209 of the Urtext occurs on 
page 219 of the HLC. 
Just 10 pages off. 
The material on page 886 of 
the Urtext occurs on page 866 of the HLC. 
Just 20 pages off. 
After fac¬ 
toring in the previously indicated pagination anomalies, the last three 
quarters of the Urtext is then just 47 pages longer than the HLC. 
Most of 
the page count difference is explained by differing average page length, 
however. 


If we do a word count we find that the Urtext has 224,238 words 
from page 209 to the end and the HLC from the same point to the end 
has 223,222 words. 
That’s a difference of 1,016 words or about 0.45% 
or the equivalent of roughly 3 average typed manuscript pages out of the 
690 manuscript pages involved. 


The reason why the actual page counts show a greater difference is 
that in contrast to the HLC manuscript, in the Urtext a great many pages 
have only a single paragraph and thus a lot of blank space. 
This is an¬ 
other of the oddities about the manuscript which may provide clues as to 
its origins. 
It is more likely in a retyping that one would not stop to re¬ 
place the paper after only one paragraph whereas in the original tran¬ 
script we might assume that the typist would stop at the end of that day’s 
scribing and pick up again on a new sheet of paper for the next segment. 

It seems equally possible, however, that in a retyping process following 


Appendix II - 24 


1906 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

editing, one might well try to keep the page breaks the same which could 
result both in our “a” page numbers and in pages with only a few lines, if 
different typewriters and different margin settings were used. 
This 
would most particularly be the case if one were retyping only a few 
pages within a larger segment, and there is some evidence that this in 
fact happened on at least one occasion. 
There would be a strong incen¬ 
tive in that case to keep the pagination as close as possible to the origi¬ 
nal. 


As with other physical evidence, further research may well yield fur¬ 
ther answers. 


However, the first quarter of the Urtext is 163 actual pages longer 
than the corresponding HLC material. 
Urtext 209 is really 382 pages 
from the beginning. 
Because the number of words per page is variable, 
the word count is more meaningful. 
The Urtext, from the beginning to 
chapter 8 section K is 108,659 words. 
The HLC is 79,552 or 29,107 
words shorter. 
That means this first segment of 8 chapters of the Urtext 
is 26.78% longer than the HLC compared to 0.45% longer in the last 23 
chapters. 
This is an enormous difference and reflects the relative extent 
of the editing between the two segments. 


All in all these two segments are radically different from each other 
in several major characteristics strongly suggesting they reflect different 
generations of the editing and copying process. 


The early manuscripts were stored by the Scribes in sets of four three- 
ring binders, we are told, roughly eight chapters to a binder. 
Thus this 
dividing point (end of chapter 8) is approximately the end of the first 
binder. 
Were the pages from 209 to the end found separately, in the three 
binders they represent, the obvious inference one could draw would be 
that we were missing the first binder, and that we had an edited copy 
which immediately preceded the HLC and from which most of the “per¬ 
sonal” material had already been removed and otherwise showed rela¬ 
tively little difference. 
The differences between these last three binders 
of the Urtext and the HLC are really mostly minor re-writing and sub¬ 
stantial paragraph break adjustment. 
In addition we find there are nu¬ 
merous dropped words, phrases, sentences, etc. 
This is typical of visual 
copy-typing. 
In fact, the bulk of the 1,016 word difference in length be¬ 
tween the final 23 chapters of the two versions can be accounted for by 
these inadvertent omissions of words and phrases. 


There is little or nothing about this latter three quarters of the material 
which, if it didn’t bear the name “ Urtext ” would lead anyone to thi nk it 


1907 


Appendix II - 25 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

was the original Thetford Transcript as opposed to one of the later retyp¬ 
ings, indeed the one immediately preceding the HLC. 
The latter three 
quarters of the material bears few hallmarks of “oral dictation” but does 
show numerous signs of visual copying errors. 


Were one to find the first 382 pages by themselves one might well 
think, due to the chaotic numbering, that we had bits and pieces of sev¬ 
eral partial retypings presumably made during editing, pieced together in 
preparation for a further retyping or further editing, both of which we 
know did occur with this material. 
Yet the later HLC reduces these 382 
pages to 219 pages. 
So quite a bit of editing took place between the 
Urtext and the HLC. 
A huge amount in fact. 
But when we compare 
these 382 pages with the Notes we see that there are large parts omitted, 
but also significant amounts of material, more than a dozen pages, 
added! This is rather what we’d expect from an “urtext” if that word is 
used in the Britannica sense of “piecing together” from earlier sources, 
but not at all what we’d expect from the original Thetford Transcript. 


Of course it’s not at all impossible that Schucman might have skipped 
some of the more “personal” material in her Notes while dictating to 
Thetford. 
That can’t be ruled out entirely. 
It does seem doubtful how¬ 
ever because she certainly did include a great deal of personal material 
which probably should have been omitted. 
So we have no certain evi¬ 
dence that she “omitted on the fly” rather than removing material later. 

She certainly removed material later, increasingly so as the years and 
copying went on. 


The pagination chaos in the early material is somewhat baffling and 
difficult to explain at first glance. 
Some of it is explained by the “dic¬ 
tated without notes” segments which are inserted in the Urtext. 
Each 
such insertion generally commences with the page number 1. 


It appears as if the material was reorganized and renumbered multiple 
times. 
Where pages have as many as four different numbers written and 
crossed out, we cannot readily tell which number was written first. 


Given that most of the editing, save for the insertion of obvious “dictated 
without notes” segments, resulted in the removal of material, we can 
guess that where we have multiple page numbers crossed out, the larger 
numbers might generally be the earlier and the smaller numbers the later. 


In the process of editing which involved both removing and adding 
multiple pages, if the scribes paused to renumber things from time to 
time, this would pretty much explain a good deal of the renumbering that 
we see. 
In time, a more thorough examination of the many crossed out 


Appendix II - 26 


1908 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

page numbers may enable us to reconstruct the stages of compilation 
with more confidence. 


The real mystery is how it is that the 382 nd page bears the number 
209! And then that latter numbering system remains largely consistent 
to the end. 
How did they come up with the number 209? The mostly 
obvious explanation is that there is another document, 208 pages long, 
which is a condensed and edited retyping of the first eight chapters, one 
we don’t have! In fact that appears exceedingly likely to me. 
There are 
certainly other possibilities. 
On the 174 th page, the start of Chapter 3 
Section H, the numbering restarts at 1. 
The previous page is numbered 
172. 
That second numbering system is reasonably consistent through to 
the end with only minor anomalies. 
That page is dated Dec. 
10, 1965. 


So, for whatever reason, at page 172 on Dec 10, 1965 it appears the 
Scribes started the numbering all over again from 1 and thereafter more 
or less stuck to it. 


I think it should be obvious by now that further research is required to 
explain the numbers that we see but also that the numbers we see don’t 
tend to support the idea that this is the first typed transcript. 
If it were, 
and Thetford added pages to the total each time he transcribed new mate¬ 
rial, why would some pages bear as many as four different page num¬ 
bers? And why would he restart the numbering at 1 less than two 
months into the process? 

If this Urtext is the “first retyping” that “missing document” would be 
the second retyping, and we do have some evidence here then which is 
consistent with Wapnick’s claim that there were two retypings after the 
Thetford Transcript and before the HLC. 
It is possible that the early ed¬ 
iting was largely confined to the first 8 chapters and that after page 209, 
what we see is at least a “first retyping” of the Thetford Transcript. 


It’s also possible that there are, or at least once were two entire retyp¬ 
ings and what we’re looking at is the first binder of one and the last three 
binders of the other. 


It is possible that in the history of this Urtext document, that “first 
binder” of 208 pages of abridged chapters 1-8 was substituted, intention¬ 
ally or inadvertently, for the 381 page collection we now see in the 
Urtext. 
It’s also possible that there was never anything more than 381 
pages to that document. 
It may be an early “partial retyping” of the first 
eight chapters. 


It should be remembered that the scribing of the Text volume took 
place over a three year period and there is every indication that the ear- 


1909 


Appendix II - 27 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

lier material was being edited and retyped as the later material was being 
dictated. 


It seems that while we’re told there were two retypings of the Thet¬ 
ford Transcript prior to the retyping we call the HLC, in fact the early 
chapters may have been reworked more often than the later chapters. 

Certainly that is where the bulk of the editing differences occur. 


Due to the fact that we rather obviously don’t have a “single retyp¬ 
ing” here but a combination of at least two, and possibly many more par¬ 
tial retypings, it would seem clear that some of the material is certainly 
not the original Thetford Transcript. 
But that doesn’t mean that all of it 
necessarily isn’t. 


Life would be much simpler if we simply had access to all the pri¬ 
mary source material. 
It would be much easier to tell which was earlier 
and which was later when compared side by side than to try to discern 
from a single document whether it is the earlier copy, the later copy, or 
bits of both. 


A careful analysis of the page numbering chaos might indeed provide 
evidence of several different uniquely identifiable drafts, at least one of 
which just might possibly be a part of the original Thetford Transcript. 


I can offer one theory which does explain the evidence. 


This material is not a direct transcript of the Notes entirely. 
Not only 
are portions of the Notes missing, but there is material present here 
which is not present in the Notes. 
However many of its pages might rep¬ 
resent the first Notes transcript, this collection of pages has been edited, 
with material both added and removed. 


We would expect an original transcript typed by Thetford and 
proofed orally to have considerable mark-up indicating corrections of 
original typing errors. 
We see very little of that sort of thing. 


With the Thetford Transcript and with the “dictated without notes” 
fragments, Schucman, with an unknown degree of help from Thetford, 
may have pieced together the typed pages for small segments from time 
to time and then re-typed those segments with some editing changes so 
as to have a “clean copy” to share with others. 
We know that from quite 
early on, certainly as early as 1968, she was sharing at least portions of 
the material with a number of other people. 


The frequent “short pages” may actually mark the boundary of such a 
re-typed segment. 



1910 


Appendix II - 28 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

Understandably, when sharing, she’d want a reasonably clean typed 
manuscript to xerox and share, rather than one full of editing marks, cut 
out portions, insertions, handwritten corrections, etc. 


It is understandable to me how she could think of what she was doing 
in that process as ‘preparing an urtext’ from the earlier drafts since she 
would in fact be “piecing together” discreet source documents and pro¬ 
ducing what she felt to be something closer to what the Author intended 
than any one of those sources. 


I say “Schucman edited” here but of course we don’t know how much 
Thetford participated in that editing. 
It might have been a great deal, it 
might have been very little. 
We have very little information on that. 

Wapnick and FIP state that the retypings were done by Schucman, with 
only that first transcript being done by Thetford. 
Verifying this may not 
be easy. 
For the moment since I have no evidence to the contrary, I’m 
simply accepting it as a working hypothesis. 


If we assume that she undertook this kind of process several times 
with different segments of the first eight chapters, each time producing a 
unique document for circulation which was numbered page 1 to what¬ 
ever, and then later collected these separate edited and re-typed segments 
together in their chronological sequence, we can perhaps begin to ex¬ 
plain the page numbering we do in fact see. 


In this theory, they didn’t wait until the dictation was finished to edit 
and re-type it. 
The editing proceeded on previously dictated material as 
new material was being received. 
This initial editing produced re-typed 
segments of varying sizes, from time to time. 
These segments were ini¬ 
tially “stand alone documents” with their own specific pagination, pre¬ 
pared by Schuman for distribution to others. 
Later these several seg¬ 
ments were collected together along with subsequent “dictated without 
notes” segments and become what we now know as the Urtext. 
It’s im¬ 
portant to remember that the Scribes had no idea how long the dictation 
would be until it was finished. 
Certainly in the first few months where 
the material is most chaotic and heavily edited, their way of handling the 
material likely would have been evolving. 


After collecting two or more such re-typed and edited segments, a 
new numbering system for the collection would be needed. 
Earlier 
numbers would be crossed out and new ones manually written in, all this 
in preparation for yet another retyping. 
If we imagine this process was 
repeated several times, we end up with several page numbers on some 
pages. 
And that is just what we see. 



1911 


Appendix II - 29 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

What I’m suggesting here is that rather than sitting down and “retyp¬ 
ing the whole thing” with some editing, she may well have edited it 
segment by segment, at different times, retyping those small segments, 
quite possibly more than once for some of them, and then collected the 
most recent edited segments into a whole which was then further edited 
and again re-typed later. 


This is, I suggest, what the Urtext appears to be, and this account of 
its creation explains what we see. 
There is nothing in what we see to 
suggest, however, that this is entirely, or even mostly, the original Thet- 
ford Transcript. 


I don’t know how it came to appear as it does, obviously, but at least I 
can visualize some plausible means of processing which would explain 
what we see. 
It is not impossible that in this process some of the original 
Thetford Transcript pages were used without retyping. 
The fact that 
some of the material is certainly a later edited re-typing doesn’t prove 
that all of it is. 


6.6 Contra-indications 

Now so far all this evidence points to the Text volume being a later 
re-typing rather than an original oral transcript, but there are contra¬ 
indications on some pages. 
In these we see a variety of evidence which 
is quite consistent with the material being an oral dictation. 
Some 
handwritten corrections are of minor typing mistakes which could be 
oral errors and appear to be in handwriting other than Schucman’s. 
I 
don’t have enough of Thetford’s handwriting to be sure it is his, but it 
could be from what I can tell so far. 
There is at least one crossed out line 
which is also crossed out in the Notes, suggesting the correction might 
have been made in both the Notes and the original transcript at the same 
time. 
It seems unlikely such a correction would be “copied” in a “retyp¬ 
ing” so this suggests that the page in question, at least, might be the 
original Thetford Transcript. 
The contra-indications are sufficiently nu¬ 
merous in some segments to strongly suggest that at least portions of the 
Text volume may in fact be copies of that original Thetford Transcript. 


The key element here is that the Urtext is a collection of different 
pieces, and the specific creation history of the various segments might 
well be rather different. 
While some pages are almost certainly later re¬ 
typed copies, other pages may well be Thetford’s original transcript. 



1912 


Appendix 11-30 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

7 Conclusion: The Urtext is not entirely the 
Thetford Transcript 

Any conclusions based on a less than exhaustive examination of evi¬ 
dence that is sometimes fragmentary cannot be a “final” conclusion. 

There is definitely a need for further study and clarification of this ques¬ 
tion but based on the evidence examined so far, it seems indisputable 
that what emerged in 2000 as the “Urtext” of a Course in Miracles was 
assembled from at least two and almost certainly more discreet, earlier 
documents and that some of this, perhaps the majority of this, is almost 
certainly not the original Thetford Transcript although some portions 
may well be just that. 
While the evidence is strong, one way or the other 
on some pages, for other pages the evidence is less clear. 


The conclusion that there is - or at least once was - additional typed 
material from the Scribes is corroborated by other evidence, notably 
Wapnick’s enumeration of Schucman’s retypings. 
Should copies of that 
material ever become available, it will be much easier to determine 
which is “original” and which is the “copy.” Without actual copies to 
compare, most “evidence” is indirect and is more suggestive than con¬ 
clusive. 
However there is such a preponderance of “suggestive” evi¬ 
dence indicating that some pages at least are later retypings that we can 
with some certainty say that the Urtext is not entirely the Thetford Tran¬ 
script and indeed most of it does not appear to be. 


The bulk of the analysis I’ve done has been on two volumes, the Text 
most (or all) of which I believe is likely a re-typed, edited copy of the 
Thetford Transcript and the Psychotherapy volume which I suspect may 
well be an original orally produced transcript of the Notes. 
A few brief 
comments on the Workbook are in order. 
While I have done only a cur¬ 
sory examination of that manuscript with the “generational question” in 
mind I’ve seen considerable evidence of “visual” retyping and editing in 
the single typed manuscript I have available. 
I’ve also noted an absence 
of “oral typing errors” where homonyms (words that “sound alike”) are 
typed and then are corrected, although there are a few. 
Where changes 
are marked, either handwritten or typed between lines, they very rarely 
correct an inaccurate copying of the Notes. 
Most mark-up involves ei¬ 
ther a deviation from the Notes or simply changes to paragraph breaks 
which are exceedingly numerous. 
Changes of that sort are suggestive 
much more of later editing rather than early proofing. 
We would fully 
expect that in an oral transcript that had been proofed, the typist would 
make errors which deviate from the Notes and the corrections or marked- 


1913 


Appendix 11-31 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

up changes would restore the material to the reading in the Notes. 
In the 
Workbook we see a few of these but the vast preponderance of handwrit¬ 
ten changes alters typed material that is an accurate reflection of the 
Notes. 
In short, it’s not a correction of an error in copying the Notes, it 
is subsequent copy-editing. 
And the handwriting is Schucman’s. 
We 
also do see some examples of “dropped phrases” between two instances 
of the same word on adjacent lines, which is typical of visual copying 
mistakes. 


The extensive mark-up for paragraph changes, most of which is pre¬ 
served in the FIP editions, would more likely have been done late in the 
editing process with the most recent retyping rather than on the earliest, 
first typed transcript. 
This would also suggest that if there were two dif¬ 
ferent typed manuscripts of the Workbook as Wapnick suggests, we’re 
looking at the second and not the first. 


In summary, then, most of the mark-up in the Workbook appears to be 
late copy-editing just before going to press rather than early proofing of 
an oral transcript. 


Much closer and more thorough scrutiny on these other volumes is 
required before anything conclusive can be said of them, but the prelimi¬ 
nary indications certainly suggest that except for Psychotherapy and 
possibly Song of Prayer, we are dealing with an edited copy of the first 
transcript, and not the first Thetford Transcript itself. 


Little of what we’ve seen in the Urtext, outside of the Psychotherapy 
volume, is consistent with what we’ve been told about the Thetford 
Transcript. 
Rather, it is mostly consistent with a visually typed copy and 
Wapnick’s information states that such a copy was made. 
In the Text 
volume we appear to have bits and pieces of several different retypings. 

None of that excludes the possibility that some pages may in fact be that 
original Thetford Transcript. 
Now that the Notes are available we can 
see that there are large gaps in the Urtext which we’d not expect to ap¬ 
pear in the original Thetford Transcript. 
We also find that while the 
Urtext is mostly a very faithful transcript of the Notes (so is every ver¬ 
sion, for that matter), there are differences of a frequency and nature 
which suggest both inadvertent visual copying errors and intentional ed¬ 
iting, neither of which should be present in the first transcript. 


While there is generally much less editing of the “re-writing” sort be¬ 
tween the Notes and the Urtext than between the Urtext and the HLC or 
between the HLC and the FIP Abridgement, there is still a good deal 


Appendix II - 32 


1914 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

more editing than we’d expect from the Thetford Transcript original 
copy. 


Basically everything we’ve been told about the Thetford Transcript 
by people who we suppose to have seen it, including Thetford himself, 
doesn’t fit the Urtext in one or more critical ways. 
The reservations are 
so numerous and serious in nature that it must be considered extremely 
unlikely that this is the Thetford Transcript. 
Its identification as at least 
mostly the (or one of the, or a combination of two or more of the) later 
retyping(s) by Schucman is indicated. 


My best guess is that the first 381 pages are Schucman’s first retyping 
and the second 677 pages are her second retyping, assuming that Wap- 
nick’s statement that there were two retypings is correct. 
Whether the 
first one ever went past chapter eight is open to question. 
Wapnick did 
say the material was re-typed twice, but he didn’t specify that all of the 
Text volume was re-typed twice. 
That is implied, but that is not stated. 

That the second retyping included chapters one to eight is strongly sug¬ 
gested by the page number 209 at the beginning of that second part, 
roughly the start of Chapter 9. 
From that point on the typing is cleaner, 
more consistent and the page number anomalies are much fewer indicat¬ 
ing that most of it at least may be a “single retyping.” 

There is evidence then that we are missing the first eight chapters of 
the second retyping and possibly that we’re missing the last three quar¬ 
ters of the first retyping and the whole of the Thetford Transcript. 


The main evidence suggesting this is the Thetford Transcript is the 
label “ Urtext ” and the assertion by Wapnick and FIP that “urtext” means 
“original transcript.” But, as we’ve seen, Wapnick and FIP may have 
been mistaken on that point, that’s not at all what the word “urtext” nec¬ 
essarily means. 
It’s not even certain that if the Scribes used that word, 
they were referring to the original Thetford Transcript. 
The word could 
be as correctly or even more correctly applied to an edited re-typing in 
which they understood themselves to be cleaning up mistakes in an ear¬ 
lier, first rough transcript. 
It is not impossible that Wapnick assumed it 
meant the original transcript but never confirmed that assumption. 



1915 


Appendix 11-33 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 


8 How could such a mistake be made and 
persist? 

My argument is that the balance of evidence would likely convince 
any random jury that this is not, or at least largely not, the Thetford 
Transcript. 


I can offer a theory which can account for this mi si dentifi cation. 


We can recall that Wapnick says the first version of the Course he 
saw was the HLC. 
He and Helen worked on this from May of 1973 until 
late in 1975, abridging it into what became the FIP First Edition. 
It’s not 
known when he first saw any earlier material but that may not have hap¬ 
pened until after Helen’s death or at least well after he’d formed the be¬ 
lief that “urtext = original transcript.” 

I’m guessing that Helen and or Bill may have spoken to him of there 
being an “urtext” which was earlier than the HLC and of which the HLC 
was an edited abridgement. 
From the available evidence it would cer¬ 
tainly appear that this is correct: Helen and Bill edited the Urtext and 
produced the abridged HLC version. 


It is possible that Helen and or Bill may have spoken to him about the 
early scribing and transcribing and he may simply have made a mistake 
many others have made, and assumed that the first transcript and the 
“urtext” were one and the same thing rather than the latter being a de¬ 
rivative of the former. 
While he does speak of two retypings by 
Schucman prior to the HLC, he may be repeating what he was told, and 
that may be correct, but he may never have seen those other typed manu¬ 
scripts. 


If sorting out the early versions and identifying them was not impor¬ 
tant to him, and it would appear that it was never very important to him 
at the time, then it is not surprising that he never bothered to actually 
check. 
The question simply wasn’t worth the effort for him. 
Further, 
he’d have no reason to even suspect that his identification was mistaken, 
so there’d be no particular reason to check. 


Since the primary source material was withheld from scholarship, 
others who were interested did not have the opportunity to do the check¬ 
ing which would have cleared up the confusion. 


Thus a very simple and mundane misunderstanding which is emi¬ 
nently understandable persisted because no one who had the means to 


Appendix II - 34 


1916 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

check had a reason to check and no one who had a reason to check had 
the means to check. 


That could quite plausibly explain how a misidentification arose and 
didn’t get corrected. 


It is not known to me if, among the papers of Helen and Bill which 
survive, any copy of that original transcript still exists. 
Nor do I know if 
Wapnick is in possession of a copy. 
If it does exist, it should be readily 
obvious with a side by side comparison which is the earlier and more 
original. 
If it doesn’t still exist, and I am not aware of any evidence to 
suggest it does, then the confusion is even more understandable. 


I know full well that many people have been told this document is the 
Thetford Transcript and have simply believed that and never thought to 
question it. 
Why not Wapnick? In fact, having been told that myself, I 
was inclined to believe it for years even as my study of the document 
kept revealing evidence that it wasn’t. 
It was some years before I lined 
up all the evidence on both sides and concluded that most of this mate¬ 
rial simply couldn’t be the Thetford Transcript. 
This rather shows that 
the human mind, having accepted a certain assertion as correct, some¬ 
times requires rather a LOT of evidence of error before even considering 
there might be an error especially when the presence of error appears to 
be highly unlikely as it most certainly did in this case. 


I would submit then that Wapnick, not having access to the original 
documents and not being particularly interested in them at first, may eas¬ 
ily have misunderstood what the Scribes meant by the use of the unusual 
word “urtext” just as so many others have. 
That he was unfamiliar with 
the term is strongly indicated by his assertion that it comes from Abra¬ 
ham and “Ur of the Chaldees.” It doesn’t. 
Then, never having any rea¬ 
son to suspect a misunderstanding, he never felt the need to check and so 
continued to believe it was the Thetford Transcript. 


How could Wapnick be wrong? Just as any of us could be and all of 
us have been wrong a times; a simple misunderstanding which was never 
checked and so never corrected. 


The weight of evidence then is on the side of this being for the most 
part a later re-typed, edited manuscript rather than the original Thetford 
Transcript. 
I do not consider the question resolved however and it 
probably won’t be until all relevant surviving documentation has been 
very thoroughly scrutinized. 


I think it is beyond doubt that some of the Urtext is not the original 
transcript, but rather a later retyping. 
I’m reasonably convinced that 


1917 


Appendix 11-35 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

some of it is likely the original transcript and I’m entirely uncertain 
about some portions of it. 


9 Why it is important to determine the 
provenance of these manuscripts 

There are some who are thinking “so what?” What makes it impor¬ 
tant to know whether this is a first or second or even third typed copy? 

First off if we are going to claim, as many have done, and are still do¬ 
ing, that this is the “original” unedited dictation then we should know 
that the evidence does not really support that claim and in making that 
claim we are asserting what is almost certainly a falsehood. 
Eventually 
the truth generally comes out and it serves no one’s real interests to 
propagate disinformation. 
It certainly feeds the reservations of sceptics 
when they find out that they haven’t been told the truth. 
However “in¬ 
nocent” the reasons for a misunderstanding are, the suspicion will al¬ 
ways haunt the minds of some that there has been some deliberate dis¬ 
honesty and deception. 


The credibility of the Course generally is hurt when falsehoods are 
propagated. 
The credibility of the Course is also hurt when the most 
“primary” of the primary sources are unavailable. 
How can we be cer¬ 
tain that the later copies are “right” when we can’t check the originals 
and we know that there are some inadvertent copying mistakes? And 
how can we expect people not to wonder what we’re trying to hide when 
we won’t allow inspection of the primary sources? 

If we are going to make claims about provenance it behooves us to do 
more than believe the claims, we should also exercise due diligence to 
verify them! 

That’s one of the jobs of scholarship, check all the sources and evi¬ 
dence, look for mistakes, and correct the mistakes. 


Another importance involves the work of transcribing the original 
Shorthand Notebooks. 
Bill Thetford’s original transcript would be of 
enormous value in those areas where legibility is a problem in the Notes. 

Legibility is problematic sometimes because of bad photocopies, missing 
pages, and pages out of order but also because much of it is shorthand 
and abbreviations. 
In the later case some abbreviations can be expanded 
in more than one way and still be good grammar. 
The shorthand isn’t 
always unambiguous. 
Looking to any later copy can certainly give us 
clues as to what Schucman intended but any later copy is more subject to 


Appendix 11-36 


1918 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 

possible copying mistakes than the original transcript would be. 
That 
original transcript then has more “authority” as a tool to interpret the 
Notes than any later copy or indeed than all later copies. 
We could have 
a higher degree of confidence that what’s in the original transcript is 
what was originally intended than with any subsequent copy. 


Even if it should prove that the later copies are always identical to the 
Thetford Transcript in areas of uncertainty, that original transcript is still 
useful in ways that the later copies aren’t. 
With it we can know whether 
it is the same or different. 
Without it we can only wonder. 
And wonder 
about the motives of those who possess copies but refuse to let us see 
them. 


In some ways that Thetford Transcript would enable us to “ask Helen 
what she meant” where the reading in the Notes is ambiguous and ask 
her within days of her first writing the material down. 
We do know that 
her idea of what she meant changed sometimes over time and became 
very different from it had been originally. 
Whatever you make of her 
later editing changes, knowing what she originally intended to commit to 
paper has some value and the original transcript can be expected to help 
us there in ways and with a degree of confidence no later retyping can. 


Finally, if we think we have a copy of the Thetford Transcript then 
we won’t go looking for it. 
If we think we don’t have a copy and we 
recognize any importance to it, then we might go looking for it. 
Accord¬ 
ing to several sources Thetford made multiple photocopies of his original 
transcript plus at least one carbon copy. 
At one time then there were 
several copies in existence. 
While I have no evidence indicating that any 
have survived it seems quite possible that at least one might have and 
that continued searching might eventually locate it. 


In closing I would say, with Jesus in the Urtext that getting every 
word right is not crucial, but it is meaningful! 


1919 


Appendix II - 37 


Appendix II: Identifying the Urtext Manuscript 


Appendix 11-38 1920 

PROOF COPY 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

Table of Contents 


1. 
REFERENCING SUMMARY.3 

(1) Paragraph references.3 

(2) Urtext Manuscript Page Number references.3 

(3) Notes Manuscript Page Number references.3 

(4) Page Number of the current volume.3 

(5) Page Number of the whole book.3 

2. 
THE DESIGN OF THE REFERENCING SYSTEM.4 

Introduction.4 

3. 
VOLUME SPECIFICS.6 

1. 
The Text.6 

2. 
Workbook.7 

3. 
Manual for Teachers.8 

4. 
The Use of Terms.9 

5. 
Psychotherapy.9 

6. 
Song of Prayer.9 

7. 
Gifts of God.9 

4. 
USING UNREFERENCED EDITIONS.9 

Cross-Referencing to FIP.9 

Cross-Referencing to Blue Sparkly.11 

5. 
OTHER SYSTEMS INCLUDED.11 

(1) The 22 Volumes.11 

(2) Notes Archival Page Number.12 

(3) Notes PDF page number.13 

6. 
BASIC HOW-TO.13 

7. 
URTEXT TO NOTES CROSS-REFERENCE.15 

(1) Text.15 

(2) Workbook.17 

(3) Manual.18 

(4) Use of Terms.19 

(5) Psychotherapy.19 

(6) Song of Prayer.19 

8. 
URTEXT TO FIP CROSS-REFERENCE.20 

(1) Text.21 

(2) Workbook.29 

(3) Manual.30 

(4) Use of Terms.31 

(5) Psychotherapy.31 


i Q? 1 Appendix III -1 

PROOF COPY 







































Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

(6) Song of Prayer. 


(7) Gifts of God. 



Appendix III - 2 -i q?2 

PROOF COPY 




Appendix III: The Referencing System Explained 


1. 
Referencing Summary 

On the pages of the Seven Volume Urtext you will find several different 
reference systems printed. 


(1) Paragraph references 

in bold type at the start of each paragraph. 
For example, T 14 B 12. 
Each 
paragraph is referenced by Volume (Text, Workbook, Manual, Use of Terms, 
Psychotherapy, Song of Prayer, Gifts of God) Chapter number, Section letter, 
and Paragraph number. 
The Workbook is done a little differently due to its 
anomalous structure. 
See below for specifics. 


(2) Urtext Manuscript Page Number references 

in bold type have been inserted in-line exactly where the manuscript page 
break occurs. 
For example T(544) - 371 - means Text, 544th page which is 
marked 371. 
These are to facilitate cross-referencing this copy to the actual 
manuscript. 
In the Text volume the marked page numbers do not correspond to 
the actual page number after page 83. 
There are thus two numbers in the Text, 
the actual or Absolute Page Number and the marked page number. 


(3) Notes Manuscript Page Number references 

are inserted at the end of each section heading. 
These are of the form (*N 
1208 9:45). 
This means the 1208th Notes page of the current volume, Text, 
Workbook, etc., volume 9 of the 22 volumes, 45th page of volume 9 of 22. 


(4) Page Number of the current volume 

in the outside bottom comer of each page. 
These are of the form “1-22” 
where “I” is the volume number (I-VII) and 22 is the page number of the cur¬ 
rent volume. 


(5) Page Number of the whole book 

bottom of page in the centre. 



1923 


Appendix III - 3 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 


2. 
The Design of the Referencing System 

Introduction 

Biblical scholars have it easy. 
In 1560 the Geneva Bible was the first print 
edition to use the familiar system of chapter and verse divisions. 
It has been 
used in nearly all editions of all versions of all Bibles in all languages ever 
since. 
While the reference divisions are often arbitrary, you can take a Biblical 
reference, such as “John 3:16” and find exactly the same passage in almost any 
edition of any version of the Bible in almost any language. 


ACIM scholars have a tougher time. 
There are at least nine different refer¬ 
ence systems I’ve seen used in published work and several more which I know 
to exist. 
And new ones keep popping up. 


This speaks to a general problem associated with the lack of - and the need 
for - an effective standard universal reference system. 
When I set out to cross- 
reference the various ACIM versions, I carefully examined every reference sys¬ 
tem which had been used in ACIM in the attempt to find the best available. 
In 
the end I found them all wanting, but I did adopt some features from several. 


Like every other ACIM reference standard in use, it is different from all the 
others. 
Unlike every other reference standard in use, it is consistent, intuitive 
and predictable. 
Anomalies are minimized and it can be readily used on any 
edition of any version of ACIM in any language most of the time except where: 

• the original scribal chapter and section or paragraph breaks were 
moved 

• the original sequence of material was altered 

• the original material being referenced was omitted 

Each individual historical primary source document {Notes, Urtext, HLC, 
etc.) has a unique “native reference system” based on such physical characteris¬ 
tics as page and line numbers or other physical textual landmarks. 
Since no 
two sources have the identical physical structure, such references are of little or 
no cross-referencing value. 
The goal here was to develop a system that would 
not only be effective on a particular version, it would be maximally adaptable 
as a cross-referencing system for all versions. 


For the Text volume the chapter and section breaks William Thetford intro¬ 
duced into the HLC were taken as the standard and these were “retro-fitted” to 


Appendix III - 4 


1924 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

all versions. 
Insofar as the content is similar between versions then, the same 
reference will take you to the same content in all versions. 


There are several reasons for doing so: 

This system is familiar to many and has for years been a de-facto standard 
and it uses the same underlying logic as the widely known FIP system. 
It dif¬ 
fers from the FIP system not in basic logic, but rather in the consistent applica¬ 
tion of that basic logic in a fixed-tier implementation. 


It has a high degree of “scribal authority” being the original insertion of 
textual division points in the Text by the Scribes 

It is suitably sized and structured for a “universal reference system.” 

While it would not have been impossible to use the FIP reference system 
for the earlier versions, it would have been much more difficult in the early 
chapters. 
There are several other reasons why that option was not chosen. 
Most 
notable among them is its inconsistent component numbering within tiers and 
the fact that it uses floating tiers such that one cannot always determine from 
the position of a given field in a reference, precisely which tier that field speci¬ 
fies. 
It should also be pointed out that the system is legitimately copyrighted 
and the copyright holder has gained some notoriety for a propensity to sue. 

While that is less of a concern today, at the time the system was being devel¬ 
oped, that was a major consideration. 
It was not deemed to be legal to simple 
adopt the FIP system. 


If there is one thing almost all Course students can agree upon, it is that the 
FIP Second Edition reference system is awkward, confusing and often very dif¬ 
ficult to use. 
These difficulties experienced by students do not derive from the 
basic logic inherent in dividing the material up into three or four hierarchical 
tiers. 
The difficulties derive from doing so inconsistently. 
Adapting the FIP 
system while ironing outcome of its anomalies and inconsistencies seemed to 
be a better approach than simply adopting it. 


A fixed three-tier referencing system within each volume has been used. 

The tiers are chapter, section and paragraph. 
The structure of some volumes 
makes this a little awkward at some points, but generally it works well. 
The 
fields are fixed, not floating, so that the field position in the reference always 
tells you whether the field is a chapter, paragraph or section designator. 
The 
designators alternate from numeric to alphabetical. 
Volume level designators 
are always letters, chapter level designators are always numbers, sections are 
always letters, paragraphs are always numbers. 
So if a field has been dropped 


1925 


Appendix III - 5 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

at the beginning or the end to abbreviate the reference, it’s still obvious what’s 
left. 


A fourth tier is the volume, of which there are seven: Text, Workbook, 
Manual, Use of Terms, Psychotherapy, Song of Prayer and Gifts of God. 
The 
first letter of the volume name is generally used to identify it. 
So a reference of 
T 1 A 1 means Text volume, Chapter 1, Section A, Paragraph 1. 
One can al¬ 
ways add a sentence number after the paragraph number if required. 


In the Text volume there is one major anomaly in Chapter 1, Section B, 
Principles of Miracles. 
That anomaly required a unique approach, and is ex¬ 
plained below under Volume Specifics. 


In the Workbook the basic structure is of course the lesson numbers at the 
“chapter” tier. 
The Workbook isn’t only lessons however. 
In addition to lessons, 
there are 24 “non-lesson” segments which occur between lessons which are a 
bit awkward to reference. 
To solve that problem the “inter-lesson” material is 
referenced to the preceding lesson number as a second section, for reference 
purposes, except for the Introduction which occurs before Lesson 1. 
These 
anomalies are discussed more thoroughly below under Volume Specifics. 
The 
other four volumes present much more minor referencing problems in large 
part due to their small size and straightforward organization. 


In the e-texts of the source documents the original Urtext manuscript page 
numbers are indicated, either in margins or inline in bracketed numerals or the 
original pagination is simply maintained. 
In the Notes the Urtext page and 
paragraph references are marked in the margins except in the Notes Workbook 
facsimile where the paragraph level is not always marked. 
The Notes also have 
line numbers marked. 


Due to the fact that paragraph breaks are not consistent across versions, the 
lower tier of referencing which is the paragraph number doesn’t always match 
between the versions. 
Between the Urtext and the Notes however, it usually 
does. 
Also, between the HLC and TIP it usually does. 
The Urtext paragraph 
breaks have been marked in the margins of the Notes. 


3. 
Volume Specifics 

1. 
The Text 

The Text volume is cross-referenced across the Notes, and both the Urtext 
manuscript facsimile and the e-text by HLC chapter, section and in the Notes 
and Urtext, by Urtext paragraph number. 



Appendix III - 6 


1926 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

The major anomaly is in the Text volume and applies only to section B of 
Chapter 1, the “ Miracle Principles .” Rather than counting the enormous num¬ 
ber of paragraphs in that section and using a paragraph number, the miracle 
principle number is used for the third tier. 
Where a miracle principle has more 
than one paragraph, as several do, the second paragraph is marked as “b” and 
the third paragraph “c” etc. 
In a few cases there are more than 26 paragraphs 
so that the 26 th paragraph is numbered, 37z in the case of miracle principle 37 
and the 27th is numbered 37aa, the 28 th 37ab, etc. 


Many of the first 55 pages of the Notes which include this difficult section 
have been “Bookmarked”, so that you can, using the Bookmarks, get within a 
page or two in the Notes from the page reference in the Urtext e-text for this 
section. 
Thus you simply need identify the passage of interest in the Urtext, 
note the page number, and click on the “Bookmark” closest to it in the Notes to 
land within a page or so of the point you seek. 
Paragraph breaks and manu¬ 
script page numbers from the Urtext are marked in the margins of the Notes for 
convenient cross-referencing. 


Of course there is material, particularly in early chapters, which is not pre¬ 
sent in the Urtext and vice versa, and for the moment, that material is not ad¬ 
dressed by this cross-referencing system, and won’t be until that material is 
transcribed into an e-text and added to the Urtext. 


In the limited segments of the Notes omitted from the Urtext for which di¬ 
rect transcripts, or e-texts of the Notes are unavailable, the material original to 
the Notes which is not present in other versions is referenced only by the origi¬ 
nal Notes volume, folio and line numbers. 


2. 
Workbook 

The Workbook is both the easiest and the most difficult volume to refer¬ 
ence. 
The Workbook’s lesson numbers, which form the dominant structure of 
this volume, provide an obvious means of cross-referencing. 
Lesson 10 is Les¬ 
son 10 in all versions! Nothing more is needed to reference it. 
Not all 361 les¬ 
sons in the facsimile copies are Bookmarked, but in all copies all the Review 
breaks and in Part II the 14 “ What Is” breaks are marked. 
This sub-divides the 
Workbook into portions of a manageable size. 
Once you find the lesson num¬ 
ber for a quote you’ve found in any of the e-texts, it is not difficult to locate it 
in the facsimiles. 


The main trick in referencing for the Workbook is that in addition to the 
361 lessons, which provide a basic top tier reference grid for the volume, there 
are 24 additional small segments of text between lessons. 
These include Re- 


1927 


Appendix III - 7 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

view introductions, the “ What is?” homilies in part 2, etc. 
These items occur 
between actual lessons. 
One easy way to refer to them is by the preceding les¬ 
son number, such as “after lesson X.” 

This is how it was done. 
After a great deal of discussion and the testing of 
many alternatives, the least awkward option was found to be referencing these 
“non-lesson” segments as a second section of the preceding lesson. 
To distin¬ 
guish the lesson proper from the non-lesson material following it, the “section” 
designation “L” is used for the lessons proper, and for the 24 non-lesson seg¬ 
ments, informative abbreviations indicating the nature of the content are used 
as section level designators as follows: “INI” for the first Introduction, R1 
through R6 for the six Review introductions, IN2 for the Introduction to Part 2, 
W1 through W14 for the 14 “What is” segments in Part 2, FL for Final Les¬ 
sons and EP for the Epilogue. 


Each of those 24 “non-lesson” segments of text is referenced to the imme¬ 
diately preceding lesson number. 
So the first paragraph of Review 1 which 
immediately follows Lesson 50 is W 50 R1 1. 
The first paragraph of Lesson 
50 is referenced as W 50 L 1. 
In the Workbook then, there are 361 top level 
divisions of which 24 have “section” divisions other than just “L” which desig¬ 
nates the lesson proper. 
Whenever something other than “L” appears in a 
Workbook reference, it refers to one of those 24 “non-lesson segments” and the 
“chapter level” value indicates the lesson number which it follows for ease of 
look-up. 


Now generally individual lessons have no need of subdividing into sec¬ 
tions, they are such small “chapters.” The “section” tier is largely irrelevant for 
the lessons proper. 
This leaves it available to reference the non-lesson seg¬ 
ments. 


Since all versions are bookmarked identically, this should not present par¬ 
ticular difficulty. 


3. 
Manual for Teachers 

Although slightly different than the FIP system, in that all segments are 
numbered sequentially rather than referencing first segments as “Introduction” 
to keep things simple and consistent, all chapter and section breaks are Book- 
marked identically in the Urtext, both the e-text and the manual facsimile cop¬ 
ies, and the Notes. 
Urtext page numbers are also indicated on the Bookmarks. 



Appendix III - 8 


1928 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

4. 
The Use of Terms 

All the section and paragraph and page breaks in the Use of Terms are ei¬ 
ther Bookmarked or annotated in the margins in all three versions, the Notes, 
and the Urtext manuscript facsimile and the Urtext e-text. 


This is the only volume for which there presently is a largely complete 
transcription or e-text of the Notes. 
In addition to its organization according to 
the original volume, folio and line numbers, these basic “chapter and section” 
references are also included for easy of cross-referencing. 


5. 
Psychotherapy 

All the chapter and section breaks are Bookmarked in all versions. 
Thi s 
volume has delightfully small sections, making cross-referencing a snap. 


6. 
Song of Prayer 

Very little of the Song of Prayer volume is available to us in the original 
Notes. 
The five pages currently available are all annotated with the corre¬ 
sponding Urtext chapter, section and paragraph numbers. 


7 . 
Gifts of God 

In this volume each of the five discreet, dated segments is counted as a 
“chapter,” and within these short segments there is no need for divisions at the 
“section” level. 


4. 
Using Unreferenced editions 

Cross-Referencing to FIP 

The FIP reference system has been around since 1992 and has been widely 
used. 
It would be great if that could have just have been used to reference the 
earlier versions. 


In the first few chapters however, the FIP editions are massively abridged. 

There are then some 60,000 words in earlier material which are not present, and 
therefore are not referenced in the FIP editions. 
Further, FIP changed the se¬ 
quence of some of the material it did preserve. 
This makes it impossible to 
maintain any direct, sequential relationship between FIP and the earlier, larger 
versions. 



1929 


Appendix III - 9 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

When first trying to apply the FIP referencing system to the HLC it was re¬ 
alized it simply can’t be done in any way that is sensible for the HLC. 
Chapter 
and section divisions sometimes have to be moved or renamed. 
A great deal of 
material in the HLC isn’t in FIP or isn’t there in the same sequence. 
The same 
logic can be applied to the HLC, but not the same actual chapter and section 
division points in many cases. 
The HLC has its own chapter and section divi¬ 
sions which are more original and have considerably greater “scribal authority” 
than those of the later abridgment. 


A second problem with using the FIP system without modification is that it 
is inconsistent, contains many anomalies, and is anything but intuitive. 


There are several criteria which a “good” referencing system should meet: 

It should first be simple and intuitive so it is easy to use. 
Secondly it 
should be maximally usable on the many existing copies of ACIM which do 
not have any referencing system, or don’t have the same one. 
Thirdly, it would 
ideally be “universal” in that it could be readily used or at least adapted to any 
version. 


The logic of the FIP system has the potential to meet these requirements 
reasonably well, but its inconsistent application fails to be simple and intuitive 
and fails to be “universal.” 

The FIP system is based on a simple three tier-logic but unfortunately, 
doesn’t apply it consistently. 
It is this lack of consistency which makes it con¬ 
fusing. 
Sometimes the first section of a chapter is Section I, which is intuitive. 

Other times it is called “Section In.” In the original manuscript of the HLC 
(Text volume) every chapter has up to 12 sections and the first section is never 
given a title. 
FIP takes that model, keeps it most of the time, but sometimes 
gives the first sections new titles and other times just calls them “introduction.” 

Those first unnamed sections in each HLC chapter are simply labelled “ In¬ 
troduction ” and they are referenced as “Section A.” The second section in each 
chapter is “Section B. 
” 

This pattern of removing the “introductions” from the three tiers and not 
counting them as numbered elements is more pronounced in later volumes. 


Due to this anomaly in the FIP referencing system, while the references in our 
material generally look like FIP references and have the same underlying logic, 
the numerical values are often offset by one wherever FIP has declined to num¬ 
ber a component and called it something else. 
While that is often “In” it can be 
other things as well. 



1930 


Appendix III -10 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

However, if you actually examine the Tables of Contents you will generally 
recognize instantly where FIP has failed to number an element and thus where 
its numbers are offset by one. 


In Appendix II of this document conversion charts for the first six volumes 
can be found. 


Cross-Referencing to Blue Sparkly 

The chapter and section divisions in the Sparkly correspond to the original 
HLC manuscript. 
Simply count the sections, and label them ABC etc. 
Make 
sure to number as “A” the first, untitled section in each chapter. 
This can be 
done with any copy of the HLC which has the chapter and section and para¬ 
graph breaks marked correctly. 
For the Whitmore Original Edition most of the 
chapter and section breaks can be used, but the paragraph breaks are sometimes 
rather scrambled and are numbered in an entirely novel and original way. 
Thus 
the relative position of a unique Original Edition paragraph designation within 
a chapter really cannot be correlated with any other copy of ACIM in any con¬ 
sistent way. 
So ignore those numbers and treat it as if there were no numbers 
other than chapter numbers. 
To a large extent, Whitmore’s Original Edition 
preserves the actual original chapter and sections divisions making those “tex¬ 
tual landmarks” a useable basis for referencing. 


5. 
Other Systems included 

(1) The 22 Volumes 

In an effort to be inclusive of other means of referencing, and due to the 
fact that the Notes are organized into a volume and page number system unique 
to that collection, those volume and page numbers are included in the header 
for each Notes facsimile page. 
The original volume/folio information for the 
LJrtext manuscript facsimile cannot be provided because it is not currently 
available. 


In the Urtext e-texts the Notes volume/folio references are included section 
by section for ease of cross-referencing. 


This system is based on the physical notes pages which are identified by 
their volume and page numbers, followed by an optional line number. 



1931 


Appendix III -11 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

(2) Notes Archival Page Number 

T the “Archival Page Number” for the Notes within each of the six ca¬ 
nonical volumes, Text, Workbook, Manual for Teachers, Use of Terms, Psycho¬ 
therapy and Song of Prayer. 


The volume divisions of the “22 Volumes ” do not correspond to the vol¬ 
ume divisions of the “7 volumes. 
” The word “volume” here can get a bit con¬ 
fusing. 
There are these two ways of organizing the Notes material into vol¬ 
umes. 
One is the system found in the “22 volumes ” and the other is the more 
common and familiar arrangement of the seven canonical volumes. 
The Notes 
material is referenced according to both. 


So, each folio (individual sheet of paper of the single-sided photocopy) of 
the Notes has a number of different unique identifiers, each of which is best for 
particular applications. 
You will need the volume and page number (22 vol¬ 
umes) to instantly locate the high resolution scans in the 5-CD set of high reso¬ 
lution Notes scans, for instance, as that is the basic “native” referencing in the 
Notes collection. 


Within any given canonical (the 7 volumes) volume, the Archival Page 
Number can be useful as it is an actual count of the actual individual folios. 

That page number may or may not correlate to any other numbering system in 
any other edition of any version. 
It is not known, for instance, if other copies 
of the Notes have the same number of pages, but it is known that some pages 
are missing from the original Shorthand Notebooks. 
This number is, then, rele¬ 
vant only to this particular collection. 
Since the numbering was created, for 
instance, several pages have turned up which were not present in our first copy. 

The whole scheme can’t be redone each time a single page shows up. 


This numbering follows a pattern a bit different from ordinary book num¬ 
bering. 
It numbers every sheet of paper in this specific collection of documents 
as a discreet artefact whereas the more common approach with ordinary books 
is to not put numbers on cover pages, nor include - let alone number - dupli¬ 
cate pages. 
When dealing with “archaeological specimens” and in the Notes 
material that really is closer to what we’ve got than any conventional “book” 
then every element, regardless of our initial assessment of its importance, needs 
to be labelled and there is no simpler system than to start at one end and call 
that component 1 and then increment the number by 1 for each succeeding 
component until the end. 



Appendix III -12 


1932 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 

(3) Notes PDF page number 

Having put two Notes facsimile pages on one page of the PDF file for more 
convenient display on a computer monitor, there is an additional page number 
for the PDF file itself, which is always exactly one half the actual Notes page 
number. 
The limitations of this reference are obvious. 


The PDF page number is useful strictly for navigation within Acrobat 
Reader for the two pages per sheet copies in the Scholar’s Toolbox. 
The Go 
To Page command, if given a number 'A of the Archival Page Number will 
land you at that page. 


6. 
Basic How-To 

The e-texts for the Notes, Urtext, HLC, HLC Replica and FIP editions of 
all volumes are searchable. 
If you wish to “look up” any quote in the Notes, 
first locate it in one of those e-texts. 
The Urtext is all we have for the portions 
of the Notes for which no transcripts are presently available since it is usually 
identical to the Notes. 
However, since it is sometimes worded differently than 
the later HLC and FIP versions, a quote you recall from reading one of the later 
versions may be easier to find in those versions due to different wording. 


Once you find it, note the chapter, section and paragraph numbers. 
In fact 
you can copy the Urtext chapter, section and paragraph reference into your 
clipboard. 


Then load the appropriate volume of the Notes facsimile and use the 
Bookmarks to get to the same chapter and section. 
Most of the Notes which 
corresponds to canonical material has the Urtext chapter, section and paragraph 
references marked. 
In Acrobat Reader you can press CTRL + F and “paste” 
the reference into the search box. 
Press RETURN (ENTER) and in a moment 
you should see the same paragraph in the Notes. 


In Notes material that is not referenced to the Urtext by counting para¬ 
graphs, you’ll quickly be able to identify the same paragraph in the Notes if it 
is, in fact, there. 


This approach will work more often than not from any version to get you at 
least within a page. 
Even where paragraph breaks are moved, the average 
length of paragraphs doesn’t often change a great deal. 
So paragraph 11 in one 
version might be paragraph 9 or 13 in another, but it won’t likely be off by 
more than that. 



1933 


Appendix III -13 


Appendix III - Referencing Explained 


Due to the fact that the Urtext is not word-for-word identical to the Notes in 
all cases, there are times when the passage you’re looking for either isn’t in the 
Notes or is worded differently. 
Remember too that there is material in each ver¬ 
sion not present in any other so it is always possible that the specific passage 
for which you seek simply isn’t in the version you’re searching. 


When you run into that problem, locate an adjacent paragraph in the Urtext 
e-text, and then use that reference to find the corresponding spot in the Notes. 

Having found the corresponding spot, you can then determine if the material is 
simply not there, or is worded differently, or if there is some other discrepancy. 


Usually however, the material is identical and it’s very easy to locate the 
Notes segment desired. 


Chapter and section breaks in the FIP version don’t always correspond to 
those in the others, so sometimes those references won’t be very useful. 
Usu¬ 
ally, however, once you allow for the “FIP offset” (the fact that FIP fails to 
number “introductions” and certain other elements) the FIP reference will 
closely match the universal reference after chapter 14. 
In the first half of the 
Text volume there are many differences in the number and location of chapter 
and section breaks. 


Mostly however, you can take a FIP reference, use the relevant cross- 
reference chart below, and find what the corresponding reference in the Urtext 
and Notes is. 


Note: you can search for Urtext manuscript absolute page numbers in the 
Notes material also through the seven canonical volumes, just as you would 
search for paragraph references. 



Appendix III -14 


PROOF 


1934 


COPY 


Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 


7. 
Urtext to Notes Cross-Reference 


(1) Text 


Notes p# 

Urtext: Ref 

Urtext: Page 

Notes Ref. 


1* 

T 1: 1 

: 1 

(1)1 

Volume 4 - 28 

too 

T 1 B 30g.3 

(18)18 

Volume 4 - 127 

200 

T 1 B41ag.2 

(51)51 

Volume 5 - 49 

223* 

T|:A:1 

62 

Volume 5 - 72 

266 

T 2:D:1 

(97)96 

Volume 5-115 

296* 

T3|A 1 

(120) 119 

Volume 5 - 145 

300 

T 3 A 9.1 

(121)120 

Volume 5 - 149 

389* 

T4|A1 

(185)C 12 

Volume 5-238 

391 

Text 5b 


Volume 5-240 

394* 

T4|A2 

(185)C 12 

Volume 5 - 243 

400 

T 4 A 8.1 

(187)723 ?C 14 

Volume 5 - 249 

497 

T4G21.1 

(228)C 55 

Volume 6-61 

500 

not in Urtext 


Volume 6-64 

507 

T 4 G 22.7 

(228)C 55 

Volume 6-71 

518* 

T5|A 1 

(233)C 60 

Volume 6-82 

599* 

T6|a 1 

(271)C 98 

Volume 6-164 

670 

Text 8a 


Volume 7-2 

675* 

T 7|.\ 1 

(303)C 130 

Volume 7 - 7 

700 

T 7 E 5.1 

(314)C 141 

Volume 7 - 32 

758* 

T8|A 1 

(346)C 173 

Volume 7 - 90 

800 

T 8 G 3.8 

(363)C 190 

Volume 7-132 

834 

T9 A 1 

(386)213 

Volume 7-166 

900* 

T 

9 K 2.1 

(415)- 242- 

Volume 8-4 

909* 

T 10 

A 1 

(419)- 246- 

Volume 8-13 

997* 

Til 

A 1 

(449)- 276 - 

Volume 8 - 101 

1000 

title page "Text 12b" 


Volume 8-104 

1001 

T11B 3.1 

(450)- 277 - 

Volume 8-105 

1075* 

T 12 A 1 

(485)312 

Volume 8-179 

1100 

T 12 E 2.2 

(496)- 323 - 

Volume 8 - 204 

1132* 

T 

13 

A 1 

(510)337 

Volume 8-236 

1196* 

T 

14 

A 1 

(538)365 

Volume 9-33 

1200 

T 14 B 3.1 

(540)- 367 - 

Volume 9-37 

1254* 

T 15 A 1 

(563)- 390 - 

Volume 9-91 

1300 

T 15 G 7.6 

(582)- 409 - 

Volume 9-137 

1350 

Text 15b 


Volume 9-187 

1351 Nothing that relates to a specific relationship belongs in the notes 

1354* 

T 

16 

A 1 

(601)428 

Volume 9-191 

1397* 

T 

17 

A 1 

(630)457 

Volume 9 - 234 

1400 

T 17 B 3.4 

(631)458 

Volume 9 - 237 

1454* 

T 18 A 1 

(659)486 

Volume 10 - 14 

1500 

T 181 10.3 

(687)C 511 

Volume 10-60 

1502 

Text 16b 


Volume 10-62 

1512 

T 18 K4 

(693)517 

Volume 10-72 

1513* 

Tl| A 1 

(694)518 

Volume 10-73 


1 935 Appendix III -15 

PROOF COPY 







Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 


_ TEXT _ 

Notes p# Urtext Ref Urtext Page Notes Ref. 



1552 

T 19F 10 

(713)537 

Volume 10-112 (missing) 

1557 

Not in Urtext (appears to be a letter with transcript following) 

1559 

Text 17a 


Volume 10-119 

1560- 

1566 multivariate analysis 

Oct 14 1966. 
Volume 10-120 

1567 

Text 17b 


Volume 10 -127 

1568 

T 21 D 9 

(775)596a 

Volume 10 - 128 (missing) 

1600 

T 21 15.1 

(794)615 

Volume 10 -160 

1601* 

T 22 A 1 

(795)-616- 

Volume 10-61 

1627 

Text 18a 


Volume 11-2 

1628 

T22E5 

(809)628 

Volume 11-3 

1647* 

T 23 A 1 

(819)638 

Volume 11-22 

1683* 

T 24 A 1 

(838)657 

Volume 11-59 

1687 

T24B5 

(839)658 

Volume 11-62 

1688 

Text 18 b 


Volume 11-63 

1694 

T 18H 10 

(684)(631c) 

Volume 11-69 (missing) 

1695 

T 24 C 1 

(842)661 

Volume 11-70 (missing) 

1700 

T 24 C 8.7 

(844)663 

Volume 11-75 

1735* 

T 25 A 1 

(864)683 

Volume 11-110 

1800 

T 25 J 6.3 

(898)717 

Volume 11-175 

1803* 

T 26 A 1 

(901)720 

Volume 11-178 

1868* 

T 27 A 1 

(934)760 

Volume 13-3 

1900 

T 27 E 6.6 

(948)774 

Volume 12 - 35 

1936* 

T 28 A 1 

(967)793 

Volume 12-71 

1983* 

T 29 A 1 

(990)816 

Volume 12-118 

2000 

T 29 D 5.4 

(998)824 

Volume 12 - 135 

2029* 

T30 A 1-B 1 

(1016)830 

Volume 12 - 164 

2083-43 T 29 H 1 ... 



Volume 12-173-178 

2045 

T30B 10 

(1019)(833) 

Volume 12-179 

2046 

T 30 C 1 

(1021)835 

Volume 12-181 

2088* 

T 31 A 1 

(1042)856 

Volume 12-223 

2100 

T 31 B 5.1 

(1047)861 

Volume 12 - 235 

2155 

T31 H 11 

(1072)886 

Volume 12 - 290 <Text ends> 


31 indicates chapter break 
24 indicates missing material 
* Indicates HLC chapter break 


Appendix III -16 1936 

PROOF COPY 









Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 


(2) Workbook 


WORKBOOK 

Notes p# 

Urtext Ref 

Urtext Page 

Notes Ref. 


1 

WInl 


Volume 

13 - 1 

135 

W 51 R 1 

88 

Volume 

13-26 

241 

W 77 L 1 

152 

Volume 

14 - 1 

258 

W 81 R 2 

162 

Volume 

14 - 17 

370 

W 111 R3 

228 

Volume 

14- 130 

480 

W135 L 18 

288 

Volume 

15 - 1 

524 

W 141 R4 

311 

Volume 

15-45 

650 

W 171 R5 

381 

Volume 

15 -171 

671 

W 182 L 1 

394 

Volume 

16- 1 

111 

W 201 R 6 

552 

Volume 

16- 107 

789 

W 221 In2 

459 

Volume 

16- 119 

797 

W 220 W 1 

462 

Volume 

16- 127 

809 

W 230 W 2 

473 

Volume 

16 - 140 

823 

W 240 W3 

484 

Volume 

16- 153 

835 

W 250 W4 

494 

Volume 

16- 165 

849 

W 260 W5 

506 

Volume 

16- 179 

863 

W 270 W6 

517 

Volume 

16- 193 

875 

W 280 W7 

528 

Volume 

16 - 206 

889 

W 290 W8 

539 

Volume 

16-219 

902 

W 300 W9 

550 

Volume 

16-232 

913 

W 307 L 1 

557 

Volume 

17- 1 

919 

W 310 W10 

561 

Volume 

17-7 

932 

W 320 W11 

528 

Volume 

17-20 

945 

W 330 W12 

539 

Volume 

17-33 

958 

W 340 W13 

594 

Volume 

17-46 

971 

W 350 W14 

605 

Volume 

17-59 

990 

W 361 Ep 

619 

Volume 

17-78 

994 

end of WB 

620 

Volume 

17-80 


1 937 Appendix III -17 

PROOF COPY 




Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 


(3) Manual 


MANUAL 

Notes p# 

Urtext Ref 

Urtext Page 

Notes Ref. 


1 

M 1 A 1 

1 

Volume 

17-83 

5 

M2 A 1 

3 

Volume 

17-87 

7 

M3 A 1 

4 

Volume 

17-89 

10 

M4 A 1 

6 

Volume 

17-92 

13 

M 5 A 1 

8 

Volume 

17-95 

31 

M 6 A 1 

18 

Volume 

17-113 

37 

M 7 A 1 

22 

Volume 

17-119 

39 

M 8 A 1 

23 

Volume 

17- 121 

43 

M9 A 1 

25 

Volume 

17-125 

47 

M 10 A 1 

27 

Volume 

17- 129 

48 

M 11 A 1 

28 

Volume 

17-130 

52 

M 12 A 1 

30 

Volume 

17-134 

56 

M 13 A 1 

32 

Volume 

17-137 

59 

M 14 A 1 

34 

Volume 

17- 141 

64 

M 15 A 1 

37 

Volume 

17-146 

67 

M 16 A 1 

39 

Volume 

17-149 

69 

M 17 A 1 

40 

Volume 

17-151 

77 

M 18 A 1 

43 

Volume 

17-159 

83 

M 19 A 1 

47 

Volume 

17-165 

85 

M 20 A 1 

48 

Volume 

17-167 

89 

M 21 A 1 

51 

Volume 

17-171 

92 

M 22 A 1 

52 

Volume 

17-174 

95 

M 23 A 1 

53 

Volume 

17-177 

100 

M 24 A 1 

56 

Volume 

17- 182 

106 

M 25 A 1 

58 

Volume 

17-188 

110 

M 26 A 1 

60 

Volume 

17- 192 

114 

M 27 A 1 

62 

Volume 

17-196 

117 

M 28 A 1 

63 

Volume 

17-199 

121 

M 29 A 1 

66 

Volume 

17-203 

129 

M 30 A 7 

70 

Volume 

17-213 


Appendix III -18 193 s 

PROOF COPY 




Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 


(4) Use of Terms 


USE OF TERMS 

Notes p# 

Urtext Ref 

rtext Page 

Notes Ref. 


1 

U 1 A 1 

1 

Volume 3 - 27 

2 

U2 A 1 

4 

Volume 3 - 30 

7 

U3 A 1 

4 

Volume 3 - 48 

10 

U4 A 1 

6 

Volume 3 - 33 

13 

U 5 A 1 

7 

Volume 3 - 36 

14 

U 6 A 1 

9 

Volume 3 - 40 

18 

U 7 A 1 

11 

Volume 3 - 44 

26 

U 8 A 1 

13 

Volume 3 - 52 

27 

U 8 A2 

13 

Volume 3-100 

28 

U 8 A5 

13 

Volume 3 - 99 

29 

U 8 A6 

14 

Volume 3 - 96 


(5) Psychotherapy 


PSYCHOTHERAPY 

Notes p# 

Urtext Ref 

Urtext Page 

Notes Ref. 


2 

P 1 A 1 

1 

Volume 3-102 

2 

P2 A 1 

1 

Volume 3-102 

6 

P3 A 1 

3 

Volume 3-106 

8 

P 3 B 1 

4 

Volume 3 - 108 

10 

P 3 C 1 

5 

Volume 3- 110 

16 

P 3 D 1 

8 

Volume 3-116 

18 

P 3 E 1 

9 

Volume 3- 118 

24 

P 3 F 1 

12 

Volume 3-124 

28 

P 3 G 1 

14 

Volume 3-128 

33 

P3H3 

16 

Volume 3 - 133 

37 

P4 A 1 

19 

Volume 3-138 

41 

P4B 1 

21 

Volume 3-141 

48 

P 4 C 1 

25 

Volume 3-148 


(6) Song of Prayer 

SONG OF PRAYER 

Notes p# 

Urtext Ref 

Urtext Page 

Notes Ref. 


1 

S 1 A4 

2 

n/a 

2 

S 1 A6 

2 

n/a 

3 

S 1 A 7 

3 

Volume 3 - 90 

4 

S 1 A9 

3 

Volume 3-91 

5 

S 2 A 1 

12 

n/a 


1 939 Appendix III -19 

PROOF COPY 








Appendix III - Urtext to FIP Cross-Referencing 


8. 
Urtext to FIP Cross-Reference 


The following chart gives a basic section by section cross referencing of 
the Urtext to the FIP Second Edition. 
It’s very rough in the first five chapters 
because so much has been re-written and removed in the FIP editions that it is 
quite difficult to align regions of correspondence. 
This is not guaranteed to be 
100 % accurate, but it will usually provide a helpful guide for translating be¬ 
tween the two reference systems. 
This chart, of course, only translates to the 
resolution of section break at best. 
You’re on your own when it comes to 
translating paragraph numbers within sections. 


After chapter 14 the correspondence between the versions is generally 
high. 
Before that there are many differences. 



Appendix III - 20 


PROOF 


1940 


COPY 


Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 


(1) Text 


Urtext Reference FIP Reference 


1) Introduction to Miracles 

T 1 

T-in.l Introduction 


A. 


Introduction 

T 1 A 1 

T-in.l Introduction 


B. 


Principles of Miracles 

TIBI 

T-l.I.l 


C. 


Distortions of Miracle Principles 

T 1 C 1 

T-l.VI.5.3 The Illusion of Needs 

2) The Illusion of Separation 

T 2 

T-l 


A. 


Introduction 

T2 A 1 

n/a 


B. 


The Re-interpretation of Defenses 

T2B 1 

T-2.II.1.4 The Atonement as De- 


fense 





C. 


Healing as Release from Fear 

T 2 C 1 

T-2.IV.1 


D. 


Fear as Lack of Love 

T 2 D 1 

T-2.VI. 
1 Fear and Conflict 


E. 


The Correction for the Lack of Love 

T 2 E 1 



F. 


The Meaning of the Last Judgment 

T2 F 1 

T-2.VIII.2 

3) Retraining the Mind 

T 3 

T-3 The Innocent Percep- 

tion 





A. 


Introduction 

T3 A 1 



B. 


Special Principles for Miracle Workers 

T 3 B 1 

T-2.V.A. 
1 


C. 


Atonement without Sacrifice 

T3 C 1 

T-3.I.1 


D. 


Miracles as Accurate Perception 

T3 D 1 

T-3.11.1 Miracles as True Per- 


ception 

E. 


Perception vs. 
Knowledge 

T3 E 1 

T-3.III.1 


F. 


Conflict and the Ego 

T 3 F 1 

T-3.IV. 
1 Error and the Ego 


G. 


The Loss of Certainty 

T 3 G 1 

T-3 . 
V. 
1 Beyond Perception 


H. 


Judgment and the Authority Problem 

T3 H 1 

T-3.VI. 
1 


I. 


Creating vs. 
the Self-Image 

T3 G 1 

T-3.VII. 
1 

4) The Root of all Evil 

T 4 

T-4 The Illusions of the 

Ego 





A. 


Introduction 

T4 A 1 



B. 


Right Teaching and Right Learning 

T4B 1 

T-3.VI.7 


C. 


The Ego and False Autonomy 

T 4 C 1 

T-4.II.1 


D. 


Love without Conflict 

T4D 1 

T-4.III.I 


E. 


The Escape from Fear 

T 4 E 1 

T-4.IV.1 This Need Not Be 


F. 


The Ego-Body Illusion 

T 4 F 1 

T-4.V.1 


G. 


The Constant State 

T 4 G 1 



H. 


Creation and Communication 

T 4 H 1 

T-4. 
VII. 
1 


I. 


True Rehabilitation 

T4G 1 


5) Healing and Wholeness 

T 5 

T-5 


A. 


Introduction 

T5 A 1 

T-5.in. 
1 


B. 


Healing as Joining 

T 5 B 1 

T-5.I.1 The Invitation to the 


Holy 





C. 


The Mind of the Atonement 

T 5 C 1 



D. 


The Voice for God 

T5D 1 



E. 


The Guide to Salvation 

T 5 E 1 

T-5.III. 
1 


F. 


Therapy and Teaching 

T 5 F 1 



G. 


The Two Decisions 

T 5 G 1 

T-5.V.1 The Ego’s use of Guilt 


H. 


Time and Eternity 

T 5 H 2 

T-5.VI. 
1 


I. 


The Eternal Fixation 

T5 I 1 

T-5.VII?? The Decision for God 


1941 Appendix III - 21 

PROOF COPY 


























Appendix III - Urtext to FIP Cross-Referencing 


6) Attack and Fear 

T 6 

T-6 



A. 


Introduction 

T6 A 1 

T-6.in. 
1 



B. 


The Message of the Crucifixion 

T 6 B 1 

T-6.I.1 



C. 


The Uses of Projection 

T 6 C 1 

T-6.II. 
1 



D. 


The Relinquishment of Attack 

T 6 D 1 

T-6.III. 
1 



E. 


The Only Answer 

T 6 E 1 

T-6.IV. 
1 



F. 


“To Have, Give All to All” 

T 6 F 1 

T-6.V.1 

The Lessons of the 


Holy Instant 





G. 


“To Have Peace, Teach Peace to Learn it. 


T 6 G 1 




H. 


Be Vigilant only for God and His Kingdom 

T 6 H 1 



7) The Consistency of the Kingdom 

T 7 

T-7 



A. 


Introduction 

T7 A 1 

T-7.I.1 



B. 


Bargaining versus Healing 

T 7 B 1 

T-7.1.4 



C. 


The Laws of Mind 

T7C 1 

T-7.II.2 

The Law of the King- 


dom 






D. 


The Unified Curriculum 

T 7 D 1 

T-7.III. 
1 

The Reality of the 


Kingdom 





E. 


The Recognition of Truth 

T 7 E 1 

T-7.III.2 

Healing as the Recog- 


nition of Truth 





F. 


Healing and the Changelessness of Mind 

T 7 F 1 

T-7.V.1 



G. 


From Vigilance to Peace 

T 7 G 1 

T-7. 
VI. 
1 



H. 


The Total commitment 

T 7 H 1 

T-7.VII.1 

The Totality of the 


Kingdom 





i. 


The Defense of Conflict T 7 I 1 

T-7.VIII. 


1 The Unbelievable Belief 


j. 


The Extension of the Kingdom 

T7 J 1 

T-7.IX. 
1 



K. 


The Confusion of Strength and Weakness 

T7K 1 

T-7.X.3 

The Confusion of Pain 


and Joy 






L. 


The State of Grace 

T 7 L 1 

T-7.XI.1 


8) The Journey Back 

T 8 

T-8 



A. 


Introduction 

T8 A 1 

T-8.I.1 

The Direction of the 


Curriculum 





B. 


The Direction of the Curriculum 

T 8 B 1 

T-8.1.3.4 



C. 


The Rationale for Choice 

T 8 C 1 

T-8.II.1 

The Difference be- 


tween Imprisonment and 





D. 


The Holy Encounter 

T 8 D 1 

T-8.III.1 



E. 


The Light of the World 

T 8 E 1 

T-8.IV. 
1 

The Gift of Freedom 


F. 


The Power of Joint Decision 

T 8 F 1 

T-8.VI. 
1 

The Treasure of God 


G. 


Communication and the Ego-Body Equation 

T 8 G 1 

T-8.VII.1 

The Body as a Means 


of Communication 





H. 


The Body as Means or End 

T8H 1 

T-8. 
VIII. 
1 


I. 


Healing as Corrected Perception 

T 8 I 1 

T-8.IX. 
1 



J. 


The Acceptance of Reality 

T 8 J 1 

T-9.I.1 

Ch. 
9 The Acceptance 


of the Atonement 





K. 


The Answer to Prayer 

T8K1 

T-9.II.1 


9) The Correction of Error 

T9 

T-9.III 

Ch. 
9 The Acceptance 

of the Atonement 





A. 


Introduction 

T 9 A 1 

T-9.III. 
1 

The Correction of Er- 


B. 


Sanity and Perception 

T 9 B 1 

T-9.III.4 



C. 


Atonement as a Lesson in Sharing 

T 9 C 1 

T-9.IV. 
1 

The Holy Spirit’s Plan 


of Forgiveness 





D. 


The Unhealed Healer 

T 9 D 1 

T-9.V.1 



Appendix III - 22 1942 

PROOF 


COPY 




















Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 




E. 



The Awareness of the Holy Spirit 

T 9 E 1 

T-9.VI.1 

The Acceptance of 



your Brother 







F. 



Salvation and God’s Will 

T 9 F 1 

T-9.VH. 
1 

The Two evaluations 



G. 



Grandeur vs. 
Grandiosity 

T 9 G 1 

T-9.VIII.1 




H. 



The Inclusiveness of Creation 

T 9 H 1 

T-10.in.l 

Ch. 
10 The Idols of 



Sickness 







i. 



The Decision to Forget 

T 9 I 1 

T-10.II.1 

At Home in God 



j. 



Magic vs. 
Miracles 

T 9 J 1 

T-10.IV.1 The End of Sickness 



K. 



The Denial of God 

T 9 K 1 

T-10.V.1 



10) 

God and the Ego 

T 10 

T-l 1 

God or the Ego 



A. 



Introduction 

T 10 A 1 

T-ll.in.l 




B. 



Projection vs. 
Extension 

T 10B 1 

T-l 1.in.3 




C. 



The Willingness for Healing 

T 10C 1 

T-l 1.11.1 

The Invitation to Heal- 



mg 








D. 



From Darkness to Light 

T 10 D 1 

T-l 1 .III. 
1 




E. 



The Inheritance of God’s Son 

T 10 E 1 

T-n.rv.1 




F. 



The “Dynamics” of the Ego 

T 10 F 1 

T-ll.V.l 




G. 



Experience and Perception 

T 10 G 1 

T-l l.VI.l Waking to Redemption 



H. 



The problem and the Answer 

T 10H 1 

T-l 1. 
VII. 
1 The Condition of Real- 



ity 







ii) 

God’s Plan for Salvation 

T 11 

T-12 

The Holy Spirit’s Cur- 


riculum 







A. 



Introduction 

THAI 

T-12.I.1 

The Judgment of the 




Holy Spirit 





B. 



The Judgment of the Holy Spirit 

T 11 B 1 

T-12.1.3 



C. 



The Mechanism of Miracles 

T 11 C 1 

T-12.1.9 

The Way to Remember 




God 





D. 



The Investment in Reality 

T 11 D 1 

T-12.III.1 



E. 



Seeking and Finding 

T 11 E 1 

T-12.IV.1 



F. 



The Sane Curriculum 

T 11 F 1 

T-12.V.1 



G. 



The Vision of Christ 

T 11 G 1 

T-12.VI. 
1 



H. 



The Guide for Miracles 

T 11 H 1 

T-12.VI.1 Looking Within 


I. 



Reality and Redemption 

T11I1 

T-12.VIII.lThe Attraction of 




Love for Love 





J. 



Guiltlessness and Invulnerability T 11 J 1 

T-13.in.l 

Ch. 
13 The Guiltless World 


12) The Problem of Guilt T 12 T-13.II The Guilt- 

less World 


A. 


Introduction 

T 12 A 1 

T-13.II.1 The Guiltless Son of 

God 




B. 


Crucifixion by Guilt 

T 12 B 1 

T-13.11.3 

C. 


The Fear of Redemption 

T 12 C 1 

T-1.3.TTT.1 

D. 


Healing and Time 

T 12 D 1 

T-13.IV.1 The Function of Time 

E. 


The Two Emotions 

T 12 E 1 

T-13.V.1 

F. 


Finding the Present 

T 12 F 1 

T-13.VI.1 

G. 


Attainment of the Real World 

T 12 G 1 

T-13.VII.1 

13) From Perception to Knowledge 

T 13 

T-l3.VII The Guilt- 

less World 




A. 


Introduction 

T 13 A 1 

T-13.VII.lFrom Perception to 

Knowledge 




B. 


The Role of Healing 

T 13 B 1 

T-13.VII.3 

C. 


The Shadow of Guilt 

T 13 C 1 

T-13.IX.1 The Cloud of Guilt 

D. 


Release and Restoration 

T 13 D 1 

T-13 .X. 
1 Release from Guilt 

E. 


The Guarantee of Heaven 

T 13 E 1 

T-13.XI.3 The Peace of Heaven 


PROO 


1943 


COP 


Appendix III - 23 






















Appendix III - Urtext to FIP Cross-Referencing 



F. 


The Testimony of Miracles 

T 13 F 1 

T-14.in.l Ch. 
14 Teaching for 


Truth (Introduction) 




G. 


The Happy Learner 

T 13 G 1 

T-14.11.1 


H. 


The Decision for Guiltlessness 

T 13 H 1 

T-14.III.1 


I. 


Atonement 

The Way of Salvation 

T 13 I 1 

T-14.IV.1 Your Function in the 


14) Bringing Illusions to Truth 

T 14 

T-14.IV.7 


A. 


Introduction 

T 14 A 1 

T-14.IV.7 Your Function in the 


Atonement 

B. 


Guilt and Guiltlessness 

T 14 B 1 

T-14.IV. 
lOThe Circle of Atone- 


ment 

C. 


nication 

Out of the Darkness 

T 14 C 1 

T-14.VI.1 The Light of Commu- 


D. 


Perception without Deceit 

T 14 D 1 

T-14.VII. 
1 Sharing Perception 


with the Holy Spirit 




E. 


liness 

The Recognition of Holiness 

T 14 E 1 

T-14.IX.1 The Reflection of Ho- 


F. 


The Shift to Miracles 

T 14 F 1 

T-14.X.1 The Equality of Mira- 


cles 





G. 


The Test of Truth 

T 14 G 1 

T-14.XI.1 


15) The Purpose of Time 

T 15 

T-15 The Holy Instant 


A. 


Uses of Time 

Introduction 


T 15 A 1 T-15.1.1 The Two 


B. 


The Uses of Time 

T 15 B 1 

T-15.1.3 


C. 


Time and Eternity 

T 15 C 1 

T-15.11.1 The End of Doubt 


D. 


Littleness and Magnitude 

T 15 D 1 

T- 15 . 
111.1 


E. 


Practicing the Holy Instant 

T 15 E 1 

T-15JV.1 


F. 


The Holy Instant and Special Relation- 

T 15 F 1 

T-15.V.1 


G. 


The Holy Instant and the Laws of God 

T 15 G 1 

T-15.VI.1 


H. 


The Holy Instant and Communication 

T 15 FI 1 

T-15.VII.lThe Needless Sacrifice 


I. 


The Holy Instant and Real Relationships 

T 15 I 1 

T-15.VIII.lThe Only Real Rela- 


tionship 

J. 


The Time of Christ 

T 15 J 1 

T-15.X.1 The Time of Rebirth 


K. 


of Sacrifice 

The End of Sacrifice 

T 15 K 1 

T-15.XI.1 Christmas as the End 


Appendix III - 24 1944 

PROOF COPY 














Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 


Urtext Reference FIP Reference 



16) The Forgiveness of Illusions 

T 16 

T-16 


A. 


Introduction 

T 

16 A 1 

T-16.I.1 True Empathy 


B. 


True Empathy 

T 

16 B 1 

T-16.I.4 


C. 


The Magnitude of Holiness 

T 

16 C 1 

T-16.II.1 The Power of Holiness 


D. 


The Reward of Teaching 

T 

16 D 1 

T-16.III. 
1 


E. 


Illusion and Reality of Love 

T 

16 E 1 

T-16.IV. 
1 


F. 


pletion 

Specialness and Guilt 

T 

16 F 1 

T-16.V. 
1 The Choice for Com- 


G. 


The Bridge to the Real World 

T 

16 G 1 

T-16.VI. 
1 


H. 


The End of Illusions 

T 

16 H 1 

T-16.VII.1 


17) Forgiveness and Healing 

Relationship 

T 17 

T-17 Forgiveness and the Holy 


A. 


Truth 

Introduction 

T 

17 A 1 

T-17.1.1 Bringing Fantasy to 


B. 


Fantasy and Distorted Perception 

T 

17 B 1 

T-17.I.3 


C. 


The Forgiven World 

T 

17 C 1 

T-17.H.1 


D. 


Shadows of the Past 

T 

17 D 1 

T-17.TTT.1 


E. 


Perception and the Two Worlds 

T 

17 E 1 

T-17.IV.1 The Two Pictures 


F. 


The Healed Relationship 

T 

17 F 1 

T-17.V.1 


G. 


Practical Forgiveness 

T 

17 G 1 

T-17.VI.1 Setting the Goal 


H. 


The Need for Faith 

T 

17 H 1 

T-17.VII.lThe Call for Faith 


I. 


Peace 

The Conditions of Forgiveness 

T 

171 1 

T-17.VIII. 
1 The Conditions of 


18) The Dream and the Reality 

Dream 

T 18 

T-18 The Passing of the 


A. 


Introduction 

T 

18 A 1 

T-18.1.1 The Substitute Reality 


B. 


Substitution as a Defense 

T 

18 B 1 

T-18.1.4 


C. 


The Basis of the Dream 

T 

18 C 1 

T-18.II.1 


D. 


Light in the Dream 

T 

18 D 1 

T-18.III.1 


E. 


The Little Willingness 

T 

18 E 1 

T-18.IV.1 


F. 


The Happy Dream 

T 

18 F 1 

T-18.V.1 


G. 


Dreams and the Body 

T 

18 G 1 

T-18.VI. 
1 Beyond the Body 


H. 


“I Need do Nothing” 

T 

18 H 1 

T-18.VII.1 


I. 


The Purpose of the Body 

T 

18 I 1 

T-18.VIII.lThe Little Garden 


J. 


The Delusional Thought System 

T 

18 J 1 

T-18.IX.1 The Two Worlds 


K. 


The Passing of the Dream 

T 

18 K 1 

T-18.IX.il 


19) Beyond the body 

Peace 

T 19 

T-19 The Attainment of 


A. 


Peace 

Introduction 

T 

19 A 1 

T-19.1.1 The Attainment of 


B. 


Healing and the Mind 

T 

19 B 1 

T-19. 
1 .3 Healing and Faith 


C. 


Sin vs. 
Error 

T 

19 C 1 

T-19.II.1 


D. 


The Unreality of Sin 

T 

19 D 1 

T-19.III.1 


E. 


of It 

Obstacles to Peace - 1 

T 

19 E 1 

T-19.IV.1 The Desire to Get Rid 


F. 


The Attraction of Guilt 

T 

19 F 1 

T-19.IV.A.10 


G. 


is Valuable 

Obstacles to Peace II 

T 

19 G 1 

T-19.IV.B.lThe Belief the Body 


H. 


Pain 

Pleasure and Pain 

T 

19 H 1 

T-19.IV.B.9The Attraction of 


i. 


Death 

Obstacles to Peace III 

T 

191 1 

T-19.IV.C.lThe Attraction of 


PROOF 


1945 


Appendix III - 25 

COPY 























Appendix III - Urtext to FIP Cross-Referencing 



J. 


The Incorruptible Body 

T 19 J 1 

T-19.IV.C.3 


K. 


Obstacles to Peace IV 

T 19 J 1 

T-19.IV.D.lThe Fear of God 


L. 


The Lifting of the Veil 

T 19 L 1 

T-19.IV.D.8 

20) The Promise of the Resurrection 

T 20 

T-20 The Vision of Holiness 


A. 


Introduction 

T 20 A 1 

T-20.I.1 Holy Week 


B. 


Holy Week 

T 20 B 1 

T-20.I.2 


C. 


Thoms and Lillies 

T 20 C 1 

T-20.II. 
1 The Gift of Lilies 


D. 


Sin as an Adjustment 

T 20 D 1 

T-20.III. 
1 


E. 


Entering the Ark 

T 20 E 1 

T-20.IV.1 


F. 


Heralds of Eternity 

T 20 F 1 

T-20.V.1 


G. 


The Temple of the Holy Spirit 

T 20 G 1 

T-20. 
VI. 
1 


H. 


The Consistency of Means and end 

T 20 H 1 

T-20. 
VII. 
1 


I. 


The Vision of Sinlessness 

T 20 I 1 

T-20.VIII.1 

21) The Inner Picture 

T 21 

T-21 Reason and Perception 


A. 


Introduction 

T 21 A 1 

T-21.in. 
1 


B. 


The Imagined World 

T 21 B 1 

T-21.1.1 The Forgotten Song 


C. 


The Responsibility for Sight 

T 21 C 1 

T-21.II.1 


D. 


Faith, Belief and Vision 

T 21 D 1 

T-21. 
III. 
1 


E. 


The Fear to Look Within 

T 21 E 1 

T-21.IV. 
1 


F. 


Reason and Perception 

T 21 F 1 

T-21.V.1 The Function of Rea- 


son 





G. 


Reason and Correction 

T 21 G 1 

T-21.VI. 
1 Reason vs. 
Madness 


H. 


Perception and Wishes 

T 21 H 1 

T-21.VIII.lThe Last Unanswered 


Question 

I. 


The Inner Shift 

T 21 I 1 

T-21. 
VIII. 
1 

22) Salvation and the Holy Relationship T 22 T-22 


A. 


Introduction 

T 22 A 1 

T-22.in. 
1 


B. 


The Message of the Holy Relationship 

T 22 B 1 

T-22.I.1 


C. 


Your Brother’s Sinlessness 

T 22 C 1 

T-22.II.1 


D. 


of Error 

Reason and the Holy Relationship 

T 22 D 1 

T-22.III. 
1 Reason and the Forms 


E. 


The Branching of the Road 

T 22 E 1 

T-22.IV.1 


F. 


Weakness and Defensiveness 

T 22 F 1 

T-22.V.1 


G. 


Relatioship 

Freedom and the Holy Spirit 

T 22 G 1 

T-22. 
VI. 
1 The Light of the Holy 

23) The War Against Yourself 

T 23 

T-23 


A. 


Introduction 

T 23 A 1 

T-23.in. 
1 


B. 


The Irreconcilable Beliefs 

T 23 B 1 

T-23.I.1 


C. 


The Laws of Chaos 

T 23 C 1 

T-23.II. 
1 


D. 


Salvation Without Compromise 

T 23 D 1 

T-23.III.1 


E. 


ground 

The Fear of Life 

T 23 E 1 

T-23.IV. 
1 Above the Battle- 

24) Specialness and Separation T 24 T-24 

The Goal of Specialness 


A. 


Introduction 

T 24 A 1 

T-24.in.1 


B. 


Specialness as a Substitute for Love 

T 24 B 1 

T-24.1.1 


C. 


The Treachery of Specialness 

T 24 C 1 

T-24.II. 
1 


D. 


The Forgiveness of Specialness 

T 24 D 1 

T-24.III. 
1 


E. 


Specialness and Salvation 

T 24 E 1 

T-24.IV. 
1 Specialness Vs. 



Sinlessness 

F. 


The Resolution of the Dream 

T 24 F 1 

T-24.V. 
1 The Christ in You 


G. 


Salvation from Fear 

T 24 G 1 

T-24. 
VI. 
1 


H. 


The Meeting-Place 

T 24 H 1 

T-24.VII.lThe Meeting Place 


Appendix III - 26 194 R 

PROOF COPY 


























Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 



25) The Remedy 

T 25 

T-25 The Justice of God 


A. 


Introduction 

T 25 A 1 

T-25.in. 
1 


B. 


The Appointed Task 

T 25 B 1 

T-25.1.1 The Link to Truth 


C. 


The Savior from the Dark 

T 25 C 1 

T-25.II. 
1 


D. 


The Fundamental Law of Perception 

T 25 D 1 

T-25.III. 
1 Perception and Choice 


E. 


The Joining of Minds 

T 25 E 1 

T-25.IV. 
1 The Light You Bring 


F. 


The State of Sinlessness 

T 25 F 1 

T-25.V.1 


G. 


The Special Function 

T 25 G 1 

T-25. 
VI. 
1 


H. 


Commuting the Sentence 

T 25 H 1 

T-25.VII.lThe Rock of Salvation 


I. 


Love 

The Principle of Salvation 

T 25 I 1 

T-25.VIII. 
1 Justice Returned to 


J. 


The Justice of Heaven 

T 25 J 1 

T-25.IX. 
1 


26) 

The Transition 

T 26 

T-26 


A. 


Oneness 

Introduction 

T 26 A 1 

T-26.I.1 The “Sacrifice” of 


B. 


The “Sacrifice” of Oneness 

T 26 B 1 

T-26.1.2 


c. 


rection 

The Forms of Error 

T 26 C 1 

T-26.II.1 Many Forms; One Cor- 


D. 


The Borderland 

T 26 D 1 

T-26.III.1 


E. 


Where Sin has Left 

T 26 E 1 

T-26.IV.1 


F. 


The Little Hindrance 

T 26 F 1 

T-26.V.1 


G. 


The appointed Friend 

T 26 G 1 

T-26.VI.1 


H. 


Review of Principles 

T 26 FI 1 

T-26.VII.lThe Laws of Healing 


I. 


The Immediacy of Salvation 

T 26 I 1 

T-26. 
VIII. 
1 


J. 


For They Have Come 

T 16 J 1 

T-26.IX. 
1 


K. 


The Remaining Task 

T 26 J 1 

T-26.X. 
1 The End of Injustice 


27) The Body and the Dream 

T 27 

T-27 The Healing of the Dream 


A. 


fixion 

Introduction 

T 27 A 1 

T-27.1.1 The Picture of Cruci- 


B. 


The Picture of the Crucifixion 

T 27 B 1 

T-27.I.3 


C. 


The Fear of Healing 

T 27 C 1 

T-27.II.1 


D. 


The Symbol of the Impossible 

T 27 D 1 

T-27.III. 
1 Beyond All Symbols 


E. 


The Quiet Answer 

T 27 E 1 

T-27.IV. 
1 


F. 


The Healing Example 

T27E 1 

T-27.V.1 


G. 


The Purpose of Pain 

T 27 F 1 

T-27.VI. 
1 The Witnesses to Sin 


H. 


Dream 

The Illusion of Suffering 

T 27 G 1 

T-27.VII.lThe Dreamer of the 


i. 


The “Hero” of the Dream 

T 27 FI 1 

T-27. 
VIII. 
1 


28) The undoing of Fear 

T 28 

T-28 


A. 


B. 


Introduction 

The Present Memory T 28 B 1 

T 28 A 1 
T-28.I. 
4 

T-28.F1 The Present Memory 


C. 


Reversing Effect and Cause 

T 28 C 1 

T-28.II.1 


D. 


The Agreement to Join 

T 28 D 1 

T-28.III.1 


E. 


The Greater Joining 

T 28 E 1 

T-28.IV.1 


F. 


The Alternate to Dreams of Fear 

T 28 F 1 

T-28.V.1 


G. 


The Secret Vows 

T 28 G 1 

T-28. 
VI. 
1 


H. 


The Beautiful Relationship 

T 28 FI 1 

T-28.VII.lThe Ark of Safety 


29) The Awakening 

T 29 

T-29 


A. 


Introduction 

T 29 A 1 

T-29.I.1 


B. 


The Closing of the Gap 

T 29 B 1 

T-29.1.4 


C. 


The Coming of the Guest 

T 29 C 1 

T-29.II.1 


D. 


God’s Witnesses 

T 29 D 1 

T-29.III.1 


1947 Appendix III - 27 

PROOF COPY 
























Appendix III - Urtext to FIP Cross-Referencing 



E. 


F. 


G. 


End of Time 

H. 


Yourself 

I. 


J. 


Dream Roles 

The Changeless Dwelling-Place 
Forgiveness and Peace 

The Lingering Dream 

Christ and Anti-Christ 

The Forgiving Dream 

T 29 E 1 

T 29 F 1 

T 29 G 1 

T 29 H 1 

T 29 I 1 

T 29 J 1 

T-29.IV. 
1 

T-29.V.1 

T-29.VI.1 Forgiveness and the 

T-29.VII.lSeek not Outside 

T-29.VIII.lThe Anti-Christ 
T-29.IX.1 


30) The New Beginning 

T 30 

T-30 


A. 


Introduction 

T 30 A 1 

T-30.in. 
1 


B. 


Rules for Decision 

T 30 B 1 

T-30.I.1 


C. 


Freedom of Will 

T 30 C 1 

T-30.II. 
1 


D. 


Beyond All Idols 

T 30 D 1 

T-30.III.1 


E. 


The Truth Behind illusions 

T 30 E 1 

T-30.IV. 
1 


F. 


The Only Purpose 

T 30 F 1 

T-30.V.1 


G. 


The Justification for Forgiveness 

T 30 G 1 

T-30. 
VI. 
1 


H. 


The New Interpretation 

T 30 H 1 

T-30. 
VII. 
1 


I. 


Changeless Reality 

T 30 I 1 

T-30. 
VIII. 
1 


31) The Simplicity of Salvation 

T 31 

T-31 The Final Vision 


A. 


cifixion 

Introduction 

T 31 A 1 

T-31.1.1 The Picture of the Cru- 


B. 


Christ 

The Illusion of an Enemy 

T 31 B 1 

T-31.11.1 Walking with the 


C. 


The Self-Accused 

T 31 C 1 

T-31.III. 
1 


D. 


The Real Alternative 

T 31 D 1 

T-31.IV. 
1 


E. 


Self-Concept vs. 
Self 

T 31 E 1 

T-31.V.1 


F. 


Recognizing the Spirit 

T 31 F 1 

T-31.VI.1 


G. 


The Savior’s Vision 

T 31 G 1 

T-31. 
VII. 
1 


H. 


Choose Once Again 

T 31 FI 1 

T-31.VIII. 
1 


Appendix III - 28 194ft 

PROOF COPY 














Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 


(2) Workbook 

Urtext Reference FIP Reference 


1) 

Introduction 

W 1 INI 

W-in 

2) 

Review 1 

W50R1 

W-pI.rl 

3) 

Review 2 

W80R2 

W-pI.rll 

4) 

Review 3 

W 110R3 

W-pI.rlll 

5) 

Review 4 

W 140 R4 

W-pI.rlV 

6) 

Review 5 

W 170 R5 

W-pI.rV 

7) 

Review 6 

W 200 R6 

W-pI.rVI 

8) 

Introduction to Part II 

W 220 IN2 

W-pII.in 

9) 

What is forgiveness? 

W 220 W1 

W-pII.l 

10) 

What is Salvation? 

W 230 W2 

W-pII.2 

11) 

What is the World? 

W 240 W3 

W-pII.3 

12) 

What is Sin? 

W 250 W4 

W-pII.4 

13) 

What is the Body? 

W 260 W5 

W-pII.5 

14) 

What is the Christ? 

W 270 W6 

W-pII.6 

15) 

What is the Holy Spirit? 

W 280 W7 

W-pII.7 

16) 

What is the Real World? 

W 290 W8 

W-pII.8 

17) 

What is the Second Coming? W 300 W9 

W-pII.9 

18) 

What is the Last Judgment? 

W 310 W10 

W-pII.10 

19) 

What is Creation? 

W 320 W11 

W-pII.l 1 

20) 

What is the Ego? 

W 330 W12 

W-pII.12 

21) 

What is the Miracle? 

W 340 W13 

W-pII.l 3 

22) 

What am I? 

W 350 W14 

W-pII.l 4 

23) 

Final Lessons 

W 361 FL 

W.fl.in. 
1 

24) 

Epilogue 

W 361 EP 

W.ep 


In the Workbook, of course, the basic reference grid is the 361 individual 
lessons which are always of the form W 200 L n where n is the para¬ 
graph number and “200” is the actual lesson number from 1-361. 
Al¬ 
though lessons always have a single section, the section designator “L” 
is used to distinguish the numbered lesson from the following non-lesson 
material in the 24 instances, listed above, where material other than les¬ 
sons is included in the Workbook. 
After lesson 200, for instance, we 
have the sixth review. 
That segment is referenced as W 200 R6 n 
where n is the paragraph number. 
This provides the information most 
critical to actually finding it in a printed book; it follows lesson 200! 


1949 


Appendix III - 29 









Appendix III - Urtext to FIP Cross-Referencing 


( 3 ) Manual 


Urtext Reference FIP Reference 


1) 

2) 

3) 

4) 

5) 

Introduction 

Who are God’s Teachers? 

Who are their students? 

What are the Levels of Teaching? 

What are the Characteristics of God’s Teachers? 

M 1 A 1 
M2 A 1 

M 3 A 1 
M4 A 1 

M5 A 1 

M-in.l 

M-l.l 

M-2.1 

M-3.1 

M-4.1 



A. 
Introduction 

M5 A 1 

M-4.1 



B. 
Trust 

M5 B 1 

M-4.1.1 



C. 
Honesty 

M5 C 1 

M-4.II.1 



D. 
Tolerance 

M5D 1 

M-4.III. 
1 



E. 
Gentleness 

M 5 E 1 

M-4.IV.1 



F. 
Joy 

M5 F 1 

M-4.V.1 



G. 
Defenselessness 

M 5 G 1 

M-4.VI.1 



H. 
Generosity 

M 5 H 1 

M-4.VII. 
1 



I. 
Patience 

M 5 I 1 

M-4.VIII.1 



J. 
Faithfulness 

M5 J 1 

M-4.IX.1 



K. 
Open-Mindedness 

M5K1 

M-4.X.1 

6) 

How is Healing Accomplished? 

M 6 A 1 

M-5.1 



L. 
Introduction 

M6 A 1 

M-5.1 - M-5.2 



M. 
The Perceived Purpose of Sickness 

M6B 1 

M-5.1.1 



N. 
The Shift in Perception 

M 6 C 1 

M-5.il. 
1 



O. 
The Function of the Teacher 

M 6 D 1 

M-5.III. 
1 

7) 

Is Healing Certain? 

M7 A 1 

M-6.1 

8) 

Should Healing be Repeated? 

M 8 A 1 

M-7.1 

9) 

How can the Perception of Order of Difficulties be M 9 A 1 

M-8.1 

10) 

Are changes required in the life situations of Go 

.M 10 A 1 

M-9.1 

11) 

How is Judgment Relinquished? 

M 11 A 1 

M-10.1 

12) 

How is Peace Possible? 

M 12 A 1 

M-11.1 

13) 

How many Teachers of God are needed to sae the 

M 13 A 1 

M-12.1 

14) 

What is the Real Meaning of Sacrifice? 

M 14 A 1 

M-13.1 

15) 

How will the World end? 

M 15 A 1 

M-14.1 

16) 

Is each one to be judged in the end? 

M 16 A 1 

M-15.1 

17) 

How should the Teacher of God spend his day? 

M 17 A 1 

M-16.1 

18) 

How do God’s Teachers deal with their Pupils’ t 

M 18 A 1 

M-17.1 

19) 

How is Correction Made? 

M 19 A 1 

M-18.1 

20) 

What is Justice? 

M 20 A 1 

M-19.1 

21) 

What is the Peace of God? 

M 21 A 1 

M-20.1 

22) 

What is the Role of Words in Healing? 

M 22 A 1 

M-21.1 

23) 

How are Healing and Atonement Related? 

M 23 A 1 

M-22.1 

24) 

Does Jesus have a Special Place in Healing? 

M 24 A 1 

M-23.1 

25) 

Is Reincarnation True? 

M 25 A 1 

M-24.1 

26) 

Are Psychic Powers Desirable? 

M 26 A 1 

M-25.1 

27) 

Can God be Reached Directly? 

M 27 A 1 

M-26.1 

28) 

What is Death? 

M 28 A 1 

M-27.1 

29) 

What is the Resurrection? 

M 29 A 1 

M-28.1 

30) 

As for the rest... 


M 30 A 1 

M-29.1 


Appendix III - 30 1950 

PROOF COPY 

















Appendix III - Urtext to Notes Cross-Referencing 
( 4 ) Use of Terms 

Urtext Reference FIP Ref 


1) 

Introduction 

U 1 A 1 

C-in.l 

2) 

Mind-Spirit 

U2A1 

C-l.l 

3) 

The Ego-The Miracle 

U 3 A 1 

C-2.1 

4) 

Forgiveness- The Face of Christ 

U 4 A 1 

C-3.1 

5) 

Perception-Knowledge 

U5 A 1 

C-4.1 

6) 

Jesus-Christ 

U 6 A 1 

C-5.1 

7) 

The Holy Spirit 

U 7 A 1 

C-6.1 

8) 

Epilogue 

U 8 A 1 

C-7.1 


( 5 ) Psychotherapy 

Urtext Reference FIP Ref 


1) An Introduction to Psychotherapy 

2) The Purpose of Psychotherapy 

P 1 A 1 

P2 A 1 

P-in.l 

P-1.in. 



A. 
Introduction 

P2 A 1 

P-l.in.l 

3) The Process of Psychotherapy 

P3 A 1 

P-2.1 


B. 
Introduction 

P 3 A 1 

P-2.in. 
1 


C. 
The Limits on Psychotherapy 

P 3 B 1 

P-2.1.1 


D. 
The Place of Religion in Psychotherapy P 3 C 1 

P-2.II. 
1 


E. 
The Role of the Psychotherapist 

P 3 D 1 

P-2. 
III. 
1 


F. 
The Process of Illness 

P 3 E 1 

P-2.IV. 
1 


G. 
The Process of Healing 

P 3 F 1 

P-2.V.1 


H. 
The Definition of Healing 

P 3 G 1 

P-2. 
VI. 
1 


I. 
The Ideal Patient-Therapist Relationship P 3 H 1 

P-2. 
VII. 
1 

4) The Practice of Psychotherapy 

P4 A 1 

P-3.1 


J. 
The Selection of Patients 

P4 A 1 

P-3.1.1 


K. 
Is Psychotherapy a Profession? 

P4B 1 

P-3.II. 
1 


L. 
The Question of Payment 

P 4 C 1 

P-3.III. 
1 


1951 Appendix III - 31 

PROOF COPY 



















Appendix III - Urtext to FIP Cross-Referencing 


(6) Song of Prayer 



Urtext Reference 

FIP Ref 


1) 

Prayer 


S 1 A 1 

S-in.l 


A. 


Introduction 

S 1 A 1 

S-in. 
1 


B. 


True Prayer 

S 1 B 1 

S-l.I.l 


C. 


The Ladder of Prayer 

S 1 C 1 

S-l.II.l 


D. 


Praying for Others 

S 1 D 1 

S-l.IIi.l 


E. 


Praying with Others 

S 1 E 1 

S-l.IV.l 


F. 


The Ladder Ends 

S 1 F 1 

S-l.V.l 

2) 

Forgiveness 


S2 A 1 

S-2. 



A. 


Introduction 

S2 A 1 

S-2.in.l 


B. 


Forgiveness of Yourself 

S2 B 1 

s-2.1.1 


C. 


Forgiveness-to-destroy 

S 2 C 1 

S-2.II. 
1 


D. 


F orgi veness-for- S al vation 

S 2 D 1 

S-2.III. 
1 

3) 

Healing 


S3 A 1 

S-3.1 


A. 


Introduction 

S3 A 1 

S-3.in.l 


B. 


The Cause of Sickness 

S 3 B 1 

S-3.1.1 


C. 


False versus True Healing 

S 3 C 1 

S-3.II. 
1 


D. 


Separation versus Union 

S 3 D 1 

S-3.III.1 


E. 


The Holiness of Healing 

S 3 E 1 

S-3.IV.1 


(7) Gifts of God 

The Foundation editions do not include the Gifts of God. 



Appendix III - 32 -i 95 ? 

PROOF COPY 



















Appendix IV: The Nature and Significance of the Version Differences 


The Nature and Significance of the 
Version Differences 

by Doug Thompson 

Those new to the Course will likely soon discover what long-time 
Course students generally know about: there are multiple versions of A 
Course in Miracles and some people have some rather strong opinions 
about which is “best.” As one who uses - and publishes - all the versions I 
have access to, I wish to shed some light on a debate which often seems to 
generate more heat than light. 


First I want to say that whatever version you have, read it and study it! 

If you come across a passage that leaves you wondering ... 
see if it is the 
same in the other versions. 
Sometimes that experience is an eye-opener. 

Sometimes you’re puzzling over a typo. 


Second I want to say that there is no “perfect version” and none without 
errors and flaws. 
Nor is there one without unique merits. 
The Scholar’s 
Toolbox on-line or on digital media contains four Scribal Versions, which 
is to say versions one or both of the Scribes had a hand in creating, and I’m 
pretty sure there exists at least one more we haven’t yet seen. 
Each is an 
important “primary source” which helps us see more clearly what the elu¬ 
sive “original dictation” really was, and how it was that none captured it 
perfectly. 


When looking at the various versions, these questions often come to 
mind: 

What is the nature of the differences? 

What is their significance? 

Which version is the best? 

First off we must remember that no one has even identified, let alone 
carefully examined all the differences. 
Every opinion on this topic is there¬ 
fore based on fragmentary data if it is based on data at all. 
Of the thousands 
of differences between versions I’ve personally looked at I can say that 
among the frequent fairly minor differences, some are anything but minor. 

The differences fall into two broad categories: 


1953 


Appendix IV - 1 


1) Many appear to be simply inadvertent copying mistakes which are 
easy to correct and are mostly, but not entirely, rather minor. 


2) Many others appear to be intentional changes of wording and punc¬ 
tuation three kinds: 

a. 
those which appear to be dictated corrections 

b. 
those which change the wording but do not appear intended to 
change the meaning significantly; in short editing for style 

c. 
those which appear to be editing mistakes, in that the meaning 
is changed but incorrectly changed 

d. 
those which are not obviously either corrections or corrup¬ 


tions 


With the majority of the differences it is fairly obvious, at least to me, 
whether it is a “correction” or a “corruption.” There will be differences of 
opinion about some of those but a great many really are obvious. 
With 
many, the editing appears to be unnecessary, making no significant change 
at all. 
Rather obviously there is a certain subjectivity in assessing a change 
as “error” or as a “correction” and these questions warrant careful study 
and extensive discussion. 


Every version has mistakes and every version has material which is very 
clearly more authentic and accurate than any other. 
There is no version 
with a monopoly on authenticity or accuracy. 
Of the thousands of variant 
readings, the “best” can only be ascertained by checking all the variants. 

Each version then is a source and a “witness” to the original dictation. 
No 
version is free of error, no version is without unique value. 
Each version 
contains some material not present in any other. 
Each version omits some 
material which is present in one or more others. 


This is not a hockey match in the “league of versions.” It’s not a com¬ 
petition between versions. 
This is a quest for the truth in which we have 
four witnesses who do not always agree on everything, but always sin¬ 
cerely attempt to point us to the truth, with varying degrees of reliability. 
It 
is possible to over-estimate the significance of the differences but with 
fragmentary data it is even more likely to under-estimate the differences. 

Without examining a great many, it is impossible to come up with any sort 
of reliable estimate at all. 
And until they are all examined, any appraisal is 
an “estimate” and falls short of being conclusive. 



Appendix IV - 2 


PROOF 


1954 


COPY 


Appendix IV: The Nature and Significance of the Version Differences 

From the fact that most differences are relatively minor some infer that 
“therefore the differences aren’t very important.” If one looks at a handful 
of minor differences that impression is understandable, but it would be mis¬ 
leading. 


For instance, one difference is that some 60,000 words of the original 
dictation didn’t make it into the 1975 abridgement, including the entire sec¬ 
tion on sex and possession. 
That’s about the number of words in the aver¬ 
age novel. 
That can hardly be considered a “minor” difference. 
It’s an 
enormous difference. 
If all that material was “wrong” as some suppose, 
then its removal was a very significant correction, not an inconsequential 
“minor difference.” If the removal of that material was a mistake, as others 
suppose, then its removal was a very major omission. 
Either way, it isn’t a 
“minor difference.” 

A second aspect of the “quality” of the differences is simply the “quan¬ 
tity” of the differences. 
If you put a small splatter of mud on the Mona 
Lisa, it is “minor” but if you put several thousand splatters of mud on the 
Mona Lisa, even if all of them are “minor” by themselves, the overall effect 
of so many minor problems adds up to a rather major problem. 
The clarity 
of the message suffers from a large quantity of “minor” errors. 
In the cate¬ 
gory of “minor” differences there are at least several thousand. 


Thirdly, while most of the editing changes are minor, a few have rather 
greater significance, in that they really do substantially change the content. 

If these really are “corrections” it is important to confirm them, but if these 
are editorial mistakes, it is important to correct them. 


We have then three “major” differences: 1) a huge amount of very im¬ 
portant material that was left out and 2) a huge number of “minor” altera¬ 
tions that add up to a very significant degree of difference between the 
original dictation and the final, substantially abridged and re-written publi¬ 
cation in 1975, and 3) there are a few very significant changes in the con¬ 
tent which need to be carefully studied. 


All in all then, while most of the differences will not strike most people 
as hugely important individually, some are of very great importance in¬ 
deed, and an accurate assessment of their merits is equally important to the 
goal of establishing the authentic text of A Course in Miracles as accurately 
as possible. 


Unless you are going to simply accept the editor’s decisions as always 
correct - which is problematic since they weren’t always correct - then it 


1955 


Appendix IV - 3 


becomes very important indeed to determine if any given change was made 
in error or not. 
This edition of the Seven Volume Urtext is offered in that 
Spirit: enhancing access to the material so that it is actually available for 
study. 


In the year 2000 when earlier and less edited versions of A Course in 
Miracles first became public, intense controversy immediately arose about 
the extent, nature and importance of the differences between the versions. 


In a way that was funny because strong opinions emerged long before any¬ 
one had appraised more than a handful of the actual differences. 
It was as 
if the conclusions pre-dated the evidence! 

On one side of the debate it is said that the shorter, heavily edited ver¬ 
sion published by the Foundation for Inner Peace in 1975 is the form in 
which the author wished the material to appear, and the differences in the 
earlier manuscripts represent errors which were subsequently corrected. 
In 
this view there is something “wrong” with even looking at the earlier mate¬ 
rial. 
Many who hold that view feel that the primary sources should have 
been kept secret. 
That thought is sometimes accompanied by projections of 
guilt, that those who are working on the primary sources are somehow 
“guilty” of violating Schucman’s privacy or expressed wishes in daring to 
suggest that in her editing she might have erred. 
One will even hear it said 
that the earlier manuscripts were “stolen.” If that is the case I’d like to 
know when the police were called and just who, as result of that oft-alleged 
“theft” has been denied access to the material thereby! 

On the other side of the debate one hears the argument that the original 
wording is always the more authentic and that the later editing corrupted 
the message of the original dictation. 
This opinion is also sometimes ac¬ 
companied by various kinds of guilt projections directed at those responsi¬ 
ble for making the changes and then claiming that there were “virtually no 
changes.” Given that those who did make the changes denied having done 
so for decades and appear to have deliberately kept the truth secret, it is 
perhaps not surprising that notions of “guilt” enter into the debate. 


If “theft” is depriving the legitimate owner of access to his property the 
question may be asked “who owns the words of Jesus of Nazareth and just 
who has attempted to deprive whom of access to those words? 

There is an unpleasant fact about the Course’s history which I’m not go¬ 
ing to try to deny, hide, or paper over. 
For reasons which I don’t claim to 
understand in detail, there are some who have gone to considerable lengths 
to obscure, deny, and intentionally falsify the truth about the Course’s his- 


Appendix IV - 4 


1956 


Appendix IV: The Nature and Significance of the Version Differences 

tory and origins, and even the text of the Course itself, sometimes even ly¬ 
ing under oath in court. 
There are others who have been misinformed and 
repeat incorrect information in good faith, believing it to be true. 
In such an 
environment, it is necessary to independently corroborate every claim of 
“fact” before accepting it as more than “potentially true” because some of 
what is being said isn’t actually true, even though those who repeat it may 
sincerely believe it to be true. 


Many books which refer to the Course, including such works as Gary 
Renard’s best-seller Disappearance of the Universe, conspicuously draw 
attention to the claim that the 1975 edition was “virtually unchanged” from 
the original dictation.. 
Although Renard puts those words into the mouths 
of his fictional “Ascended Masters” which include no less than his own 
reincarnated self, I think it is safe to assume that when he penned those 
words he believed them to be true. 
He heard that line from a source he 
trusted. 
There is only one problem with it: it’s not true. 


Untruths, repeated again and again with sincere conviction by people 
who actually believe them to be true, can result in severe distortions being 
widely accepted as fact and thus being repeated all the more. 


As the Course itself teaches us, guilt is always an illusion and never use¬ 
ful in determining the truth. 
The attempt to find fault and project guilt on 
individuals only obstructs any sincere attempt to discern the truth here. 

Avoiding guilt projection doesn’t mean condoning and repeating error, 
however. 


After eight years of studying many of the editing changes it is my opin¬ 
ion that the truth lies somewhere in between and just to the side of the two 
poles of opinion mentioned above. 
There is some truth to each of those 
polar opposite opinions, but each leaves out some crucial facts and is an 
incomplete account. 


The first idea we need to deal with is that of “infallibly.” If Jesus spoke 
to Helen as many suppose, and Helen was able to hear and record his words 
correctly at all, then one might - and some do - infer that surely Jesus 
would have made sure that any errors were corrected so we can be confi¬ 
dent that the result in 1975 was flawless. 
There is no problem with the 
logic there. 


On the basis of that belief one could then reasonably surmise that the 
editing must have been as flawless as the dictation, and just as completely 
directed by Jesus, and therefore the result of the editing is flawless. 
But 


1957 


Appendix IV - 5 


wait, the editing changed the dictation massively, so the dictation wasn’t 
flawless in the editors’ view. 
Could the editing have suffered from the 
same flaws that the editors felt the original dictation suffered from? 

The infallibility hypothesis is plausible enough but we can test it and 
when we do the evidence does not support it. 
Helen’s hearing was some¬ 
times erratic and she did not always follow the instructions of the Author. 

To that extent she introduced errors and failed to make corrections at times. 

There is at least one example of Schucman recording a dictated correction 
in her Notes which was never actually made in subsequent copies. 
A sim¬ 
ple enough oversight but, infallibility admits of no such oversights! Helen 
Schucman was human and fallible especially when she, for whatever rea¬ 
sons, ignored the Author’s instructions and proceeded on her own with 
what she was in later years to call “my book.” She was both frightened by 
it and possessive of it. 
The hazards of the possession fallacy are well ex¬ 
plained in the 60,000 words she chose to omit. 


It is apparent to most readers that the grandeur of the poetry and prose 
in ACIM reflects a sublime intelligence which Schucman was clearly able 
to hear and record on paper with a high degree of accuracy - at least some¬ 
times. 
This savant-like capacity to hear with extraordinary clarity and re¬ 
cord with exceptional accuracy was not consistent, however. 
For a variety 
of reasons, including her own ego, her fears, and even medication the mes¬ 
sage she heard sometimes came through garbled. 


This is clearly visible in her shorthand notebooks where we can see that 
she sometimes crossed out a line and re-wrote it with changes, occasionally 
several times. 
Either she “got it wrong” the first time and the author dic¬ 
tated a correction or she “got it right” the first time but then decided on her 
own to change it afterwards. 
Either way, we see that she was not a “flaw¬ 
less recording device” operating with consistent mechanical precision, re¬ 
cording the Author’s words with 100% accuracy, but rather a human being 
applying a rare degree of skill with varying reliability. 
Her accuracy some¬ 
times appears to have been 100%, her reliability was far short of that as she 
herself readily enough acknowledged. 


She even recorded the Voice commenting on difficulty getting through 
because she was not as “right-minded” as needed and another commenting 
on her hearing difficulty being associated with her being “all doped up.” 

As we examine the differences between versions it is abundantly clear 
that Schucman’s savant-like ability to hear and record iambic pentameter 
dictation did not extend to skill in copying or editing. 
As a copy-typist she 


Appendix IV - 6 


1958 


Appendix IV: The Nature and Significance of the Version Differences 

was better than average but she certainly made her fair share of very human 
copying mistakes. 
As an editor she was compulsive and exercised a degree 
of “licence” with the material which went well beyond - and even directly 
disobeyed - the Author’s very explicit instructions, according to Kenneth 
Wapnick’s account in Absence from Felicity. 
A great many of the differ¬ 
ences between the versions are not intentional editing of any kind, they are 
simply copying mistakes. 
The idea that a supernatural author “would have 
ensured all errors were corrected” collapses when we see that quite simply 
that is not what happened. 


The idea of “infallibility” of the 1975 version is a wish projected onto 
facts which simply don’t support it. 


While the prose and poetry of the Course is sublime and even super¬ 
human at times, the editing often appears erratic, hurried, and even sloppy, 
sometimes to the point of recklessness. 
The “divine inspiration” or what¬ 
ever unusual ability one might suppose Helen Schucman brought to bear 
for the composition of the Course did not extend to the copying and edit¬ 
ing. 
One of the early instructions the Author gave to the Scribes was that 
Thetford should make the decisions about editing, not Schucman. 
It’s not 
clear how much Thetford assumed that responsibility initially but it is clear 
that as the editing proceeded in later years he was not only not in charge, he 
wasn’t even always informed and clearly did not carry out his assignment. 


I won’t even try to explain why that was the case, but it is unquestionably 
the case. 


Schuman herself said, in her still unpublished autobiography, that she 
wanted to change nearly everything while Thetford wanted to change little. 

We can see why Thetford was assigned the job of editing. 
Yet it was 
Schucman who did much of it, and this may explain a great deal of the 
problem we do in fact see with the “version differences.” In instructing the 
Scribes to give the editing job to Thetford the Author did act to ensure ac¬ 
curacy, but in disobeying the instruction the Scribes opened the door to 
inaccuracy. 
In their “collaborative” undertaking Helen’s role is explicitly 
that of “taking dictation” and Bill’s specifically that of editing. 
In the end 
Helen “took possession” of the entire enterprise, collaboration ceased, and I 
think that explains a good deal of the problem we are trying to unscramble 
today. 


In not even adequately proofing through multiple re-typings, the Scribes 
acted to ensure a high level of blatant and obvious errors which entirely 


1959 


Appendix IV - 7 


explode the infallibility myth for anyone who looks on the evidence with¬ 
out blinders. 


However much “divine guidance” might have been present in the edit¬ 
ing, it is incontrovertible that it wasn’t 100% reliable and that a great many 
very obvious mistakes were introduced. 
I don’t dispute that there was a 
divine element. 
I can prove there was also a rather large - and far from 
infallible - “human” element also. 
Sorting out the wheat from the chaff 
here is the challenge. 


It is simply a fact that a huge number of differences, many of them in¬ 
advertent mistakes, exist in the later versions. 
It is also a fact that the Au¬ 
thor apparently was more concerned to get the book into print, errors and 
all, than to clean up all the mistakes. 
We have his own words to explain 
this: “errors are not crucial.” 

The first argument then, that the 1975 Abridgement is exactly the way 
both Schucman and the Author wanted it is obviously incorrect unless we 
are to suppose that both wanted a high level of inadvertent typos which 
Schucman almost certainly didn’t even know were there. 
It has crossed my 
mind that the Author ay have been very much aware that the presence of 
such a large number of such obvious mistakes would ensure that eventually 
someone would come along who was receptive to the idea of fixing the 
mistakes and that the “infallibility” illusion would collapse upon itself 
rather quickly. 


There certainly were mistakes made by the Scribes at every point in the 
long process of editing and retyping the original dictation. 
Their editing 
and copying is far from flawless but they certainly did find and correct 
some mistakes in the editing process. 
While it may have been excessive, 
inconsistent and even reckless at points, at other points it was quite ade¬ 
quate. 
In addition to obvious and probable editing mistakes, there are some 
obvious and probable genuine corrections and enhancements which re¬ 
sulted from the editing. 
It is a mixed bag. 


In terms of “which version is best” what this means is that depending on 
the passage in question, the “best rendition” may be found in any one of 
them ! None has a monopoly on correctness, and none is free of obvious 
mistakes. 
The original wording is in my view usually better than the later, 
but by no means always. 
The problem isn’t a simple “either-or” choice 
between versions. 
To determine the “best version” of any passage with 
variant readings it is necessary to compare them all carefully in context. 
In 
most cases the “best” is fairly obvious to anyone. 
In some cases the choice 


Appendix IV - 8 


1960 


Appendix IV: The Nature and Significance of the Version Differences 

is more subjective and there are different opinions. 
In a few cases the ar¬ 
guments supporting one are equally persuasive to me as the arguments sup¬ 
porting the other and I simply have no idea which is the more authentic. 

Further research may well solve such riddles however. 


Don’t overlook that line regarding the importance of “further research.” 
God knows, as do I, that I don’t have all the answers. 
But I have a list of 
questions that could keep an army of researchers busy for generations. 


The second argument then, that the earlier variant is always the better is 
also rather obviously disproven by the evidence. 


In the debate about which version is “best” - the answer to the question 
is “it depends.” 

In a segment of the Shorthand Notes which didn’t make it into any of 
the later typed manuscripts nor any print version of the Course to appear so 
far we can read the following words: 

As long as you take accurate notes, every 

word is meaningful. 
But I can't always get through. 


Whenever possible, I will correct retroactively. 
Be 

sure to note all later corrections. 


(N 4:67) right after T19 B 20 

Fifty-five pages later in the Notes, and ten pages later in the Urtext we 
read a thought which did make it into the Urtext and which follows up on 
this idea: 


Contradictions in My words means 1 lack of un¬ 
derstanding, or scribal failures, which I make 
every effort to correct. 
But they are still not 
crucial. 
The Bible has the same problem, I assure 
you. 
And it's still being edited. 
Consider the 
power of my Word, in that it has withstood all the 
attacks of error, and is the Source of Truth. 


(N 4:122-123) T1 B 30d 

The message seems very clear in three regards: 1) “every word is mean¬ 
ingful” but 2) scribal failures are “not crucial” and 3) “I will correct ret- 


1 Some might regard this as a grammar error. 
However, the clause “contradictions in my 
words” can be construed as a singular noun clause, and if so, the grammar is correct. 



1961 


Appendix IV - 9 



roactively” along with “I will make every effort to correct. 
” The third 
theme, that of correction, is repeated. 


And there is the fourth theme about “retroactive correction” which I 
shall get to presently. 


“Errors are not crucial. 
” I’ve often thought that if you were to tear 
out every second page of the Course and give one group of students one 
half the pages and a second group the other half, and then gave each a mul¬ 
tiple choice quiz, it’s unlikely there’d be much, if any difference in their 
understanding of what the Course says. 
Careful textual scholars would 
likely extract the same basic ideas from either the odd or even numbered 
pages! It would just be a great deal more difficult and there’d be much 
more room for uncertainty if you’re missing half the text. 


“Every word is meaningful” in this regard: getting the words right 
clarifies the message and makes it easier to understand, not that every word 
is crucial to correct understanding. 
Not crucial, just meaningful. 
It’s like 
the difference between a crisp, sharp movie image in full colour and a 
faded, scratched black and white still photo of your father. 
You’d recog¬ 
nize him in either but the clarity of the one would be better than the other. 


“The power of my Word” is such that the truth can get through despite 
errors and omissions. 
The word the author chose here isn’t “words” but 
“Word.” And there is a difference. 
“Words” are what we read on pages 
and digest with our brains. 
“Word” is direct soul-level communication re¬ 
flected, always with imperfections, in “words on the page.” No matter how 
badly the “words” are scrambled the “Word” can still get through! 

“I will correct retroactively” isn’t given a time limit and from the sec¬ 
ond expression of the theme of correction, “/ will make every effort to cor¬ 
rect” we can perhaps surmise that the effort will continue until complete. 
I 
don’t foresee it being complete in my lifetime. 


If those are the words of the Author and they are true then he will make 
“every effort to correct” any scribal errors that remain. 
We can presume he 
is doing so right now. 
If there are remaining scribal errors then he is mak¬ 
ing every effort to correct them. 


There are scribal errors. 
We know that. 


Therefore he is making every effort to correct them. 
We know that too. 


The “fact” is that however remarkable and even miraculous the accom¬ 
plishments of the Scribes and their early helpers, and however valid their 


1962 


Appendix IV - 10 


Appendix IV: The Nature and Significance of the Version Differences 

guidance was at points, their proofreading was inadequate to non-existent 
resulting in innumerable inadvertent copying mistakes. 
There are other 
differences which appear to be intentional editing or omission but given the 
lack of proofreading, it is necessary to “retroactively” review each and 
every change in order to find and correct the large number which clearly 
are mistakes and just as importantly, to identify those changes which are 
legitimate corrections of previous mistakes! 

Inquiring minds do what to know what’s a typo and what isn’t! 

That is not a particularly difficult challenge for a great many of the edit¬ 
ing changes, in my opinion. 
With most it is quite obvious whether it is a 
mistake or a correction. 


This fact of extensive and problematic editing, which is fairly well 
known, has generated an enormous amount of controversy in Course circles 
since it first emerged in 2000. 
Tempers have flared and arguments have 
raged in response to this fact but it is perhaps useful to remember the words 
of the Course: “no one can be angry at a fact. 
It is always an interpretation 
that gives rise to negative emotions, regardless of their seeming justifica¬ 
tion by what appear as facts. 
” M 18 A 4 

The idea that the Scribes and their work was infallible and entirely and 
always divinely guided and that they were incapable of human error is a 
“sacred cow” for some, and one which cannot survive in face of the facts. 


It is an idea which has been stated many times and accepted by many peo¬ 
ple and is repeated in best-sellers. 
But the fact is, the Scribes were human 
and there is plenty of very conspicuous human error in their work. 
In 
Course terms the problem here is straightforward: the belief in the infalli¬ 
bility of the Scribes is an illusion. 
The fact that there is so much anger as¬ 
sociated with the “facts” which correct the illusion points to ego- 
attachment or what the Course calls specialness. 
One form that the special¬ 
ness error can take is seeing some person at fault which results in guilt pro¬ 
jection. 
An equally serious error is to see someone as infallible and inca¬ 
pable of error in the here and now. 


Given the fact of editing errors, and the Author’s previously quoted 
co mm ents about errors and retroactive corrections, it should come as no 
surprise that today there are folks undertaking to identify and correct those 
errors, not because doing so is “crucial” to understanding the work at all, 
but because “every word is meaningful” and I don’t think I need to argue 
that the “more clear” has advantages over the “less clear.” Will anyone 


1963 


Appendix IV -11 


really argue that copying mistakes, when conclusively identified, should 
not be corrected? 

Often when I quote the Bible I am met with the response “oh well we 
know the Bible isn’t accurate, we can’t be sure those words are authentic.” 
That too is a “fact.” For centuries Bible Scholars have been poring over 
ancient manuscript fragments in response to that fact trying to discern the 
“original” text which underlies centuries of copying mistakes. 
That effort 
to identify and correct such errors is ongoing and in many respects the 
Course is part of it, correcting as it does a number of mistaken interpreta¬ 
tions of the Bible. 


In those quotes above there is a fifth idea, in which Jesus himself di¬ 
rectly compares the Course and its problems with accuracy to the Bible and 
its problems with accuracy. 


Yet some people still preach - and believe - that “every word of the Bi¬ 
ble is God-breathed and literally true.” The belief collapses with even a 
cursory examination of the evidence and because the idea of specialness, of 
an infallible text, appeals to the ego the belief also persists because some 
simply find reasons not to examine the evidence. 
A commonly cited reason 
is that scholars are “too intellectual” and “insufficiently spiritual” to be 
trusted. 
Yet without centuries of Biblical scholarship, we wouldn’t have 
the Bibles we do have today which really are considerably more accurate 
than those available 500 years ago. 


Yet that critique of “scholarship” is not entirely without a valid basis. 

Scholars can only deal with “words.” When it comes to the “Word” schol¬ 
arship may well stumble over itself. 
There is not yet on earth any genuine 
“scholarship of the Soul.” Textual exegesis on the nature of the “Holy In¬ 
stant” is never going to replace the experience of the Holy Instant. 


That’s my academic background, Biblical Studies. 
Trained in scholar¬ 
ship in the Humanities, it’s the “words” I study. 
Trained in Biblical Schol¬ 
arship I know those words are at best the portal to the “Word” to which 
they try to point. 
I’ve spent a lifetime studying the “words” of men and 
women who had experienced the “Word” and try to tell me about it I mere 
“words.” 

The “words” of the Course are very much “not crucial” though they 
may be “meaningful.” What’s crucial is the “Word!” The mere “words” 
are important only if they do or fail to do their job, which is that of com¬ 
municating the “Word!” 


Appendix IV - 12 


1964 


Appendix IV: The Nature and Significance of the Version Differences 

And it’s partly from that background that I developed this mindset that 
errors in the “words” of Holy Writ should be identified and corrected 
where possible. 
How can you interpret a text if you don’t know what it is? 
And what point is there in trying to interpret typos? When I discovered in 
1999 that the Course suffered from some of the same copying mistakes as 
Biblical manuscripts, it was as natural as breathing to me to apply myself 
and my academic training to the problem of identifying and correcting the 
copying mistakes. 
And from my academic background I had a clear idea of 
at least one way of doing that, a way generally called Primary Textual 
Scholarship. 
An obvious starting point is to identify and track copying 
mistakes. 
Like any human undertaking, scholarship is far from perfect. 


But it’s also far from useless. 
When we find one of the thousands of 
copying mistakes, we can sometimes fix it! We won’t find them all and we 
might even mistake a correction for a copying mistake now and then, but 
textual scholarship certainly can clean up a lot of the problems and produce 
a more accurate if still imperfect result. 


What we do have for the Course is what we don’t have for the Bible, 
most of the original written documentation. 
Comparison allows us to read¬ 
ily identify exactly where copying errors arose and exactly what they are 
and usually allows us to correct those earlier errors with a very high degree 
of confidence. 


And that’s the task I feel called to undertake for A Course in Miracles. 

Clean up as many of the “words” as we can. 
Do what the Scribes were un¬ 
able to do decades ago for reasons we may never fully understand. 


When the Scribes asked for “guidance” as to how to proceed in publish¬ 
ing the material back in 1975 they reported having received several clear 
instructions. 
Among them was that the original dictation should be pub¬ 
lished without modification. 
I take that to mean not that they should in¬ 
clude typos but rather that they should correct any mistakes they had intro¬ 
duced in order to publish what had originally been dictated, correctly with 
no scribal errors. 
I will also assume they came as close to that as they were 
able at the time with the resources available to them. 
I’m also quite certain 
they were unaware of many of the copying mistakes. 
In light of the above- 
quoted statement that copying errors are not crucial it is quite conceivable 
to me that it was more important to the Author to get the books into print 
promptly than it was to find and correct every last mistake. 


Today, with more time and resources to apply, and the benefit of 20-20 
hindsight, it is possible to come closer to that original instruction from the 


1965 


Appendix IV -13 


Author. 
I take it that what Helen and Bill published in 1975 was the closest 
they could come to following that guidance. 
Today, 33 years later, I can 
come a bit closer. 
It’s still not perfect. 
But it’s closer to that original dicta¬ 
tion they were instructed to publish. 
It has been, to some extent, “retroac¬ 
tively corrected.” 

I emphasize “to some extent.” The job is by no means complete. 
This is 
not perfect and there is a long road ahead of which I am aware and perhaps 
a longer one of which I am not yet aware. 
The road ahead involves the 
careful, diligent, prayerful and scholarly examination of every editing 
change. 
We don’t even kn ow yet what all the changes were! To discover 
that we must carefully examine all the primary source material. 


So far I’ve dealt mostly with the simplest of the version problems, inad¬ 
vertent copying mistakes or “scribal error.” Some of the most important 
changes in content fairly obviously were quite intentional. 
In some cases it 
is just as obviously mistaken as the inadvertent omissions. 
In other cases it 
is less clear. 


There is another vital concept in the previously cited quote, that “con¬ 
tradictions” may derive from either an incorrect understanding or scribal 
failure. 
A significant proportion of the later editing appears to have been 
intended to rectify apparent contradictions. 
These are among the most sub¬ 
stantial alterations, where the content really is changed. 
In many of these 
instances it is my opinion that the “contradiction” being “corrected” de¬ 
rived from a lack of understanding of the material on the part of the editors 
rather than a failure of the Scribes to correctly record the Author’s words. 


In short, while I can see how they perceived a contradiction and how they 
tried to fix it, I don’t think the contradiction was in the text itself, I think it 
arose from their misunderstanding of the text. 


I might be wrong on that and I might be right but I mean to find out. 


I have looked at numerous examples of re-writing which change the 
meaning of a passage I don’t think was originally an “error.” I think the 
editor misunderstood the material and projected a perception of error onto 
the material and then conformed it to the editor’s own misunderstanding. 


In some cases I think the evidence is so overwhelming there will be no de¬ 
bate. 
They simply blew it totally and it is obvious. 
In other cases it’s much 
less clear. 


In short, some of the editing changes derive from a “faulty understand¬ 
ing” and change the text of the Course to reflect that faulty understanding. 



Appendix IV - 14 


1966 


Appendix IV: The Nature and Significance of the Version Differences 

If I am correct that such mistakes do exist, while they might not be crucial, 
surely their correction is desirable and meaningful. 


Some of these may be as obvious to you as they are to me but I’m rather 
sure there will be differences of opinion with relation to others. 
These are 
questions which warrant much deeper scholarly research and textual analy¬ 
sis. 
We are not talking about simple and obvious copying errors here. 
We 
are talking about instances of replacing “Spiritual Eye” with “Holy Spirit” 
or “Soul” with “Spirit” where the original meaning of a passage is entirely 
transformed, often in error, in my view. 
I am not prepared to assume as a 
given either that the editors were always right or always wrong: rather I 
assume that we have to carefully appraise each editing change because 
sometimes they were right and sometimes they very obviously weren’t! 

Regardless of whether the “interpretive editing” which re-writes some 
passages and changes their meaning was “correct” or “mistaken” it is a fact 
that the general message of the Course is changed by it in the many pas¬ 
sages affected. 
Most of these changes occurred rather late in the process. 

The early editing was mostly just omissions, many of which appear to me 
to be entirely justified omissions of “strictly personal” material. 
The most 
extensive re-writing which changes the actual content and message oc¬ 
curred in the last phase of the editing. 
It is thus the case that the “earlier 
the version” the less of this “re-writing” kind of editing exists. 


If my hypothesis is correct, that most of it was unwarranted and “cor¬ 
rupts” the intended meaning, this would make the earlier versions more 
reliable than the later versions, on average. 
If my view is mistaken, and 
most of that re-writing corrects genuine scribal errors in the earlier mate¬ 
rial, then the later versions are in that respect closer to the Author’s in¬ 
tended meaning, on average. 


Which is it? Given time scholarship can provide an answer. 


This is a question, however, which every student can answer for herself 
by looking at the differences and following her own Inner Guide. 
It is not a 
question which has been sufficiently researched by a sufficient number of 
scholars for anyone to provide a definitive answer based on scholarly re¬ 
search. 
It is however the case that there is considerable evidence to support 
the hypothesis that much of the re-writing that occurred in the last phase of 
editing is more reflective of editorial interpretation of the Author’s dicta¬ 
tion than the Author’s dictation itself. 



1967 


Appendix IV -15 


Let me restate that a bit more bluntly. 
Where the most significant 
changes in content occur, in the last phase of the editing, we see more of 
the interpretation of the editors being imposed on the text than we see cor¬ 
rection of genuine mistakes in taking down the Author’s own words. 
After 
studying “the differences” for the better part of a decade, that is what I 
think. 
Can I prove it? In many cases I think I could convince any jury. 


Am I right? Further research will establish that. 


Whichever point of view is true, it is surely apparent that determining 
which is correct has some importance! 

A scholarly consensus will no doubt emerge, but only when that re¬ 
search is done 

The goal here then is not a “definitive edition” of A Course in Miracles 
but rather an accurate and accessible publication of an important part of the 
primary source material, the Urtext manuscripts. 
The goal here is not the 
“last word” on “The Word.” The goal is simply to move toward the hum¬ 
bler goal of “getting the words right.” 

Since one can hardly make that determination without actually reading 
the material, in question, it is obviously crucial that the material be made 
available for study in the most accurate form possible. 


In the case of Biblical scholarship, the original documents were either 
destroyed or are lost in desert sands or ruined cities. 
In the case of Course 
scholarship, much of the original documentation exists but those who have 
copies refuse to permit their inspection. 


Of course in order to research these questions in the name of confirming 
genuine corrections and correcting genuine errors, scholars need access to 
all of the best primary source material which exists. 
Not only has this ac¬ 
cess been systematically withheld to date, the very idea of researching 
these questions has been viewed by some as an attack on the Scribes. 
It’s 
not that. 
If it “attacks” anything, it “attacks” the illusion of their infallibil¬ 
ity because they were infallible only in illusion, not in fact. 
As the Course 
tells us, the ego can become vicious when its pet illusions are confronted 
by truth. 


The argument has not been so much that the numerous errors shouldn’t 
be corrected as it has been a denial that there are numerous errors at all 
along with an enormous effort to suppress the evidence that they are there 
and attack those presenting the evidence when it cannot be suppressed. 



1968 


Appendix IV - 16 


Appendix V: Editorial Principles 

The preparation of a rough historical manuscript for print production 
requires that editorial decisions be made regarding typos and handwritten 
mark-up. 
Working with a living author, an editor would simply consult the 
author directly regarding any uncertainties. 
When working with a 
channelled manuscript of one who has departed this plane, uncertainties 
cannot always be resolved so easily. 
We can guess, or compare the 
passage across other versions, compare discussions of the theme in other 
sections, or we can consult widely. 
More extensive textual research will 
no doubt clarify a number of areas where the manuscripts are ambiguous, 
and the work to date has added clarity to many uncertainties. 


The handwritten mark-up in particular presents a challenge. 
Some 
clearly corrects typing mistakes. 
Much of the mark-up however, alters the 
wording, punctuation, sentence, or paragraph structure of material which 
contains no obvious errors and which is also an exact copy of the 
handwritten Shorthand Notes. 
This could represent channelled corrections 
to earlier scribal errors or it could be Schucman’s infamous “compulsive 
editing,” the sort of which she was later to say “always had to be undone.” 
Although she said she wanted to change “everything” and that her changes 
had to be undone, there is very little evidence that her changes ever were 
undone and each instance could be either a correction or unwarranted 
editing. 
The goal of this work is not that of evaluating the variants as to 
their authenticity, the goal is to simply identify and present them for 
subsequent consideration. 
We can either include the mark-up modifying 
the material as marked, accepting this as the editorial decision of the 
Scribes, we can largely ignore the mark-up, or we can pick and choose 
which mark-up to accept and which to reject. 


After months of head-scratching on this one, I decided to reproduce 
what was originally typed while footnoting any handwritten mark-up other 
than the most obvious typing and spelling corrections. 
So I’ve included, 
excluded, and picked and chosen all at the same time. 
Except for the most 
trivial, I’ve also footnoted exactly what was ignored in case that material 
is of some real value. 


Editions of the Course available today fall into two categories: 

1. 
Those which reproduce every keystroke as accurately as possible, 
including all the mistakes. 
This results in a “replica” of the 
original text, and 


1969 


Appendix V -1 


Appendix V: Editorial Principles 

2. 
Those which fix “apparent” errors by making undocumented 
modifications to the original. 


The fonner approach can be considered “accurate,” and if well done it 
is certainly honest. 
The result however, is likely to be of interest only to a 
handful of scholars. 
The latter approach results in a neater, cleaner 
appearance and generally renders most of the material accurately but the 
reader can’t determine what words are from the original manuscript and 
what is editorial “fixing,” nor can the reader see where the original is 
ambiguous. 
In order to reproduce the manuscripts as accurately as 
possible and clean up the most obvious mistakes to have a reasonably 
consistent book, I have used a middle ground between the two approaches. 


Generally I’ve tried to take a very “light” hand in determining what is 
an “error.” Only the most obvious and clear “typos” are corrected. 
The 
author is fond of neologisms and novel word structures, including the 
largely archaic subjunctive mood. 
Many consider these errors, as did I 
initially. 
It was only after consultation with grammarians that I discovered 
these errors to be perfectly correct English. 
Wherever there is any chance 
the form present on the page is what was intended, in particular when the 
Notes has the same form, it is not “corrected” to a more conventional 
usage. 
If I’m in doubt about something, I leave it as it is or possibly add a 
footnote. 
Only the most obvious typing and spelling mistakes are 
changed. 


Where there is an obvious spelling mistake or inconsistency, it is 
corrected and/or standardized. 
For research and text search purposes, it 
does help if the same word is always spelled the same way. 
With a very 
few exceptions noted below, when Schucman used more than one spelling, 
that which US dictionaries indicate is the most co mm on form in the USA 
is the one chosen, since that is where Schucman was working. 
Given that 
there are many hundreds of instances, instead of footnoting each, they are 
documented here. 


Where handwritten mark-up corrects obvious typos, we simply employ 
the correction and do not footnote the fact. 
In many cases the typos were 
caught before the manuscript reached us and handwritten mark-up 
indicates the correct form. 
Most of these are trivial, represent “corrected 
typing mistakes” and footnoting each one would result in a vast number of 
entirely useless footnotes. 
Those who are interested in the study of the 
manuscripts at this level really need to work directly with the originals or 
facsimiles as no other kind of copy can really deal adequately with that 
kind of data. 



Appendix V - 2 


1970 


Appendix V: Editorial Principles 


Where there is handwritten mark-up indicating a change in the wording 
which is not obviously a correction of an error, that is to say where there is 
no apparent “typo” in what was originally typed, we use what was 
originally typed and footnote the variant suggested by the mark-up. 
That 
way the reader can see the variants contained in the manuscript, both the 
material as it was originally typed and the material as amended by the 
mark-up. 


Where there are variant readings, I’ve tried to check each of these 
mark-up variants against the Notes. 
Where the mark-up alters material 
which is different than the Notes in such a way as to reconcile it with the 
Notes then we use the Notes reading, and footnote the variant, while 
noting the fact that the choice was based on the Notes. 
In some cases I’m 
sure some readers will form the opinion that another of the variants is the 
better, and I’m rather certain that in some cases further research will prove 
that to be the case. 
Because I can’t possibly tell with certainty which 
variant is the best in all cases, the policy is to footnote them all. 
In this 
way the reader can tell in an instant that either the reading is clear and 
certain, or that there is some doubt and what the variants actually are. 
Of 
course I might be mistaken at times when selecting among variants. 
That 
is why it is crucial to let you know what the variants are so you can decide 
for yourself by whatever criteria you choose to apply. 
In time, as we 
consider these variants, a consensus is likely to emerge as to which is the 
more authentic. 


Many paragraph break changes are indicated by handwritten mark-up. 

Generally the practice has been to use the original paragraph break 
structure and ignore the mark-up. 
However, in the most recent round of 
proofing we’ve begun to footnote the presence of paragraph break mark¬ 
up rather than ignore it. 
In future editions all such mark-up should be 
noted but in this edition most of it is not footnoted. 
In a few cases in the 
early work I adopted the mark-up paragraph breaks where they seemed 
preferable to the typed breaks. 
Later, I standardized to the original breaks. 

During future proofing this policy will be the standard and some 
paragraph break points may move by a few lines. 


Biblical references where recognized are footnoted and readers are 
encouraged to advise us of any additional ones you find. 
Some themes, 
such as love and forgiveness are used so frequently in both the Course and 
the Bible that to footnote every one would result in thousands of identical 
footnotes. 
In such situations the policy is to reference the first instance 
and not repeat the footnote. 



1971 


Appendix V - 3 


Appendix V: Editorial Principles 


What I have not done is re-write the material based on what I think it 
should say. 
Only obvious spelling and grammar typing mistakes are 
corrected. 
Other ACIM editors, when convinced a passage is mistaken, 
have replaced it with their own original composition believing theirs is 
better. 
Where the Scribes provide variant readings in the various versions 
of their manuscripts, we can evaluate which is most likely to be authentic. 

Of course it is possible that the Scribes got it wrong in all variants, and 
something else entirely was intended. 
That moves beyond the arena of 
primary scholarship into the field of interpretation. 
In this work, we 
simply don’t go there. 


In the history of ACIM publishing, proofing has almost always been 
inadequate to non-existent. 
The reason is fairly obvious: it is time- 
consuming and either the resources to do a very thorough job were not 
available or if they were, other matters were considered (perhaps quite 
reasonably) of more importance. 
What we strive for is accuracy and we 
never adjust the material from what appears on the original manuscript 
pages without documenting that change, save for the rather few minor 
exceptions noted. 
Any undocumented changes are errors on our part and 
will be corrected for future editions as they are identified. 
Online editions 
will be corrected immediately. 
With publication and more eyes upon the 
pages, remaining errors are likely to be found much more quickly and you 
are invited to send reports of any suspected errors to Doug Thompson 
<dthomp74@hotmail.com>. 
We ask only that you check the online 
version first to be sure the correction has not already been made. 


I wish to stress that this edition is not published as a substitute for or 
replica of the original historical manuscripts. 
It is rather published as a 
more accessible “index” and searchable companion to them. 
The original 
manuscripts involve thousands of typed pages with no referencing. 
Most 
don’t even have page numbers and where they do, for the most part they 
are unusable because they are repeated and inconsistent. 
Yet those 
manuscripts remain the authority on what the Urtext says. 
For this reason 
we’ve included facsimiles of the manuscripts with rationalized “absolute 
page numbers” in addition to the sometimes chaotic page numbers marked 
on the original pages, and those page numbers are printed in the text in¬ 
line in bold type. 
This is to make it simple and easy for the reader to 
check the actual original manuscript facsimile any time any doubt as to the 
accuracy of this copy might arise. 


While many variant readings from the Notes are mentioned in the 
footnotes, it should be noted that no complete comparison between the 
Urtext and the Notes has been undertaken. 
There are many more variants 

Appendix V - 4 


1972 


Appendix V: Editorial Principles 


in the Notes than are indicated in this edition. 
The detailed comparison of 
all available versions and the compilation of a Catalogue of Variant 
Readings which will indicate all editing changes is the next major phase of 
the overall project which is to eventually produce a genuinely ‘definitive’ 
edition of A Course in Miracles. 


In summary then, while not 100% accurate, this is far and away the 
most complete and accurate edition of A Course in Miracles of which we 
are aware. 
This is not to say that accuracy won’t be improved with further 
scholarship, it will be. 
Where the manuscript contains variant or uncertain 
readings we have sought to document that fact, although it is certain that 
we have missed a few. 
Despite its known shortcomings, it is still far and 
away the most accurate rendition of the Course in print. 


Spelling Standardization 

These are the words whose spelling is routinely changed. 
You will 
note that few are really “errors,” they are just alternate spellings. 


1) cancelling becomes canceling 

2) marshaled becomes marshalled 

3) no one becomes no-one 

4) O becomes Oh 

5) saviour becomes savior 

6) till becomes ‘til 

7) selfsame becomes self-same 

8) re-awaken(s/ed/ing) becomes reawaken(s/ed/ing) 

9) re-inforce becomes reinforce 

10) re-inforcement becomes reinforcement 

11) re-interpretor becomes reinterpreter 

12) thru becomes through 

13) towards becomes toward 

14) whisp becomes wisp 

15) yolk becomes yoke 


1973 


Appendix V - 5 


Appendix V: Editorial Principles 


Appendix V - 6 


1974 

PROOF COPY 


An Introduction to the Scholar's Toolbox on DVD 


An essential collection of Reference Material in a "Toolbox" for Teachers, 
Students and Scholars 

• The most complete library of A Course In Miracles primary sources in facsimile 
(photocopy) and e-text (searchable) form 

• All 4 Historical Scribal Versions cross-referenced to each other. 


• The Exhaustive Concordance allows look-up of any word or phrase in A Course In Miracles. 


• An MP3 Synthesized audio reading of the entire Text of the Hugh Lynn Cayce Version. 



For all four versions, THE Scholar's Toolbox makes it easy to: 

Display, 

Search, 

Compare, 

Cross-reference, 

Cut, 

Paste, 

Quote, 

Cite 



Shorthand Notes Urtext Hugh Lynn Cayce Foundation 

for Inner Peace 


PROO 


1975 


COPY 












































What’s on the DVD? 


Global Menu of primary source documents 


The Scholar’s Toolbox I: Primary Sources 
ACB>f Primary Source Documents cross-rcfcrcnccd in PDF format 

«MJ) JMV f.lU.W 


Primary Sources Global Menu 


Ifyvufc 


dllHMEbiCf «ci»nUi II 


Return to Main Menu The aatnu b el ow wj load at ly dim of the IQMsce dorantltt mlo your PDF viewer To View two or mere lee the Tutorial 

‘..jt.’d 'ry.N vrSWi rvifliri 


It) liKwntiy Ibf V 1 V ,1 2 tj fjc »rwto 2h) vlvt tt)/tLSvm<v It) v tv*1 to) U/atmvta 4bfvfv«t So)t*.ynv)v Sblvltrt 



The pretent collection of Helen Scfaucnun’s ongrul Shorthand Notts a presetted mil volumes Seven of those are widely considered authentic dictation horn the "Voice” and 
four of those *>:&>ie other writings by Helen Sc hue man, some of which include "dtctaeed* segments Vohjmes 2 thre-ugb 4 east in three versions, Notts. 
Uruxt, and FIT 
Volume 1. 
the Text exists m a fourth veisioo. 
the Hugh Lynn Coyer Version, or HLC. 
Die U'next and the HLC manuscripts, and poebons ctf the Notes also have searchable 
“E-texts" in addrocn to the unsearchable facsxnde mages of the ceifpul manuscripts while FIT is available ociy n E-text We have cross-referenced all veroons to a standard 


A principal feature of the Scholar’s Toolbox is reproductions of many Course 
primary sources including most of the Shorthand Notes, Urtext, and Hugh Lynn 
Cayce manuscripts. 


In this screenshot of the Global Menu each of the primary source files 
is listed by version. 
Each version is available both in facsimile copies which are 
photographic reproductions of original source manuscripts and e-text copies which 
are typed, machine-searchable copies. 
The facsimile is the “real McCoy” blit the 
e-text is searchable and useful for locating particular words or passages. 
Having 
found a passage in the e-text one can then instantly locate the same spot in the 
facsimile by page number or paragraph reference due to the thorough cross- 
referencing. 


Reduced to fit on the page, this menu looks a bit too busy, but it is much 
more readable on the computer screen. 
There are also sub-menus which show the 
source files sorted by volume and by version. 


Clicking on any document name causes that document to be displayed. 

Let’s start with the Shorthand Notes, page one of the Text volume. 



1976 


























































What’s on the D VD? 


Searchable primary source documents displayed for inspection 



Above we see the Notes facsimile opened for viewing in Acrobat Reader. 

Below is the Urtext facsimile. 
Note that every chapter and section break is 
identically “Bookmarked” in each file. 




f 1 WTROOUChONTC 
8 j 2 - THE LLUStON OF 
if 3 • RETRAWNG TX 
£ 4 . 
THE ROOT OF AL 
fi 5- HEAUNG AA© 

E 6 ■ ATTACK AA© F E/ 
f 7 • THE COKSISTENC 
f 8 - THE JOURNEY B/ 
f 9 ■ THE CORRECT** 

£ io-oooanotxe 
it 11 • GGOS PLANFO 
f 12 ■ TX PROBLEM ( 
® 13 - FROM PERCEPT 
if. 
14 • BRING W3 UU$ 
if 15-TXPURPOSEI 
f 16-TXFORGNENI 
f 17-F0RG1VEXSS, 
f 18-TX DREAM ANI 
f 19- B6Y0N0 THE tX 
f 20-TX PROMISE C 
f 21 - TX INXR PICT 
if 22 -SALVATION ANC 
f 23 • TX WAR AGA* 
if 24 - SPECIALNESS t 
if 25 ■ IX REMEOY 8E 
f 36-TXTRAKSmC* 
if 27 - TX BOOY ANO 
f 28-TXUNOOWGO 
f 29 • TX AWAKENS# 

I 30.TXNPW OPrtS.' 


It la crucial to aaj first that this la a required courss. 

Only tha tine yon taka It la voluntary. 
Praa will doss not aaaa 
that yon establish tha eurrleulua. 
It Beans only that yon can 
slsot what to taka whan. 
It la Just because yon are not ready 
to do what yon should olaot to do that tlaa salats at all. 


(Too will sea alreelas thru year hands thro aa. 
Ion should begin 
aaeh day with tha prayer "Help aa to perfora whatever piracies 
yon want of aa today." ) 

| 1. 
The first thing to raaaabar about alraolea la that there 

Is no order of dlffleulty aaocg than. 
One la not harder or bigger 
than another. 
They are all the aaaa. 


2. 
Miracles do not natter. 
They are quite unlaportant. 


3. 
They occur naturally as an expression of love. 
Tha 
real alrecle la the love that lnaplrea thaa. 
In thle senae, 
everything that coses frot love Is a miracle. 


a. 
This explains the first point related to the laek of 
order. 
expressions of love are aaxlaal. 



1977 

PROOF COPY 










































What’s on the DVD? 


E-texts enable quick side by side version comparison 



In this screenshot we see a side by side comparison with the Urtext (left) 
and Notes (right) e-texts of chapter 1. 
The DVD contains a Tutorial explaining 
how to use Acrobat Reader for multi-document display. 
If you wish to see two 
versions side by side for analysis, it’s a snap for any volume of any version with 
the Scholar’s Toolbox. 
If you want four versions side by side, see below! 



This screenshot of the e-texts of the Notes, Urtext, HLC and FTP versions 
is from the dual-head computer I use for document comparison. 
If you want to 
line up four versions side by side as seen here, that’s a snap also but you need a 
dual-head computer with two monitors, otherwise things get too small to read. 

Ideally get very large monitors for this sort of work. 
The bigger the better. 



1978 

PROOF COPY 






































































What’s on the D VD? 


Facsimiles enable side by side primary source comparison 

Locating a particular paragraph in the primary source facsimile files can 
be exceedingly tedious without the cross-referencing tools provided in the 
Scholar’s Toolbox DVD. 




In this screenshot we see Acrobat Reader 9 displaying two source 
documents, the Shorthand Notes and the Urtext e-text for the Text volume, both 
opened to paragraph T 30 B 1, in a tiled window on a single monitor. 
You 
will note on the left in the “Bookmarks” pane, both documents are identically 
bookmarked. 
These “Bookmarks” enable you to open any of the primary source 
documents to any particular chapter or section. 
The e-text shown in the upper 
frame is fully searchable, so you can search for any word or phrase or reference 
with the Acrobat “Search” and “Find” buttons. 
The lower frame is a facsimile or 
image file which is actually a photograph of the handwriting. 
Photos are not 
directly searchable. 
However the “typed” reference you see added in the left 
margin (T 30 B 1) of the Notes facsimile in the lower frame is searchable text. 

Having found a passage of interest by searching the e-text or Concordance, you 
can then “search” the facsimile file for that same reference and within seconds 
locate the same passage in the original manuscript facsimile. 



PROOF 


1979 


COPY 
























What’s on the DVD? 


A basic reference and look-up tool - 

The e-texts are searchable in Acrobat Reader... 




This screenshot shows the internal Adobe Acrobat Reader Search 
function in action. 
Type in the word or phrase to search for and Acrobat Reader 
will find every instance in a single file or across multiple files. 
Click on the one 
you want and the document opens to that line. 



VI 


PROOF 


1980 


COPY 


















What’s on the D VD? 


A more powerful reference and look-up tool - 

The Seven Volume Urtext HTML Concordance 


r> tr* tfa-, freta. 


O . 
c 


tat Mat 

•*— 

URIBI ) ( 

»“-0 ■JwniioaBmtataay 

I START WawSaarch I -=- '-Vfc SI* ART Nrw Search <e>A thea r«eu [ChA|f| ad type &e woHtoacarchfee Wordbat or 

11 "<"£ 1 [ T «* J 

s*»- jws* 1 1 Ascvr | AC/M Urtvxt Seven Volume Concordance (abridged) 

£•»•** b» Subon [ A | | D 




92¥lDi7) 

(4Ti 

MKVgaAlltH ll 

■BA 

3ESSC33M) 

Xt3(«> 

SEUDWtlJ) 

ammsyia) 


anu gi 

snu£i?i 

amtc hi 

snuiii) 

aVER l l) 

zrmuuOD 



nmMk-vffiket wtachnMfctichviiforthnnio reach t-®tcidun«4 Srx art im>i k-»th WAYS OP RELATING TV 
rmart at ux relaOoruh* u 'mdti ••< Ufr* A by vAat rvi wart * to DO wVJi u WHY t wart r e. 
tf* lira place 

P»Lnn« » • w«y of ulinni in «It«w 

T I B 3‘f. 
IcAicrraijrt ieju»l «n^<jtor« rwmbi* tviicnmawi otkIt trfiir, Ihai b<A r*-n* n bc-dy rogr 
iraq>mrf>o<xii IV first u jc *xprr<no« of *i a-fttuimurc mut to reach coaamrxi 3r--<i$ 1# body TUs nrchret not 
o«)y fc-«*«*•«» reffideufitkaftoa. 
tat ibo feretpecl for the nAmataify of e&ers Seltortrol u MOTIV wtMit aniwertofta 
ptoUan. 
tk«u^> I an Vy no mr«u Ak C>ura*r 4 a wr b nun b» ta4tt<*oo4. 
Kowtow. 
iluc tf.r i*vlr?tyam tnrcHoaan nxut fcr 
uptooteA <» word you both ihoulA talersraod wt3 Kt"3g b by now not to regarA t u fntfitentg) 


UrUU lltmacnpl Past - T0Z> 3Z 

T 1 B J T q. 
ALL tha&ow root! ban to ta ugcrcOeA. 
tac aue they ate not Aeep cnou^i to nata* yea 
to be dryrtnrd «rl Su sadc to bcM a was sf S« ccryfann on «hcb the lrrtrul yl 4r GoMca Esdc. 
icftnri to twxt taler* 

♦ v' t (w»» i w d r 


In this screenshot we see the Concordance conducting the same search 
we just did in Acrobat Reader. 
The Concordance is much faster, provides better 
context and provides the paragraph reference and manuscript page number for 
each result. 
Also, unlike the search results in Acrobat Reader, the results in the 
Concordance can be cut and pasted into other documents. 
This makes it ideal for 
citation, for quoting, and for cross-referencing. 
As with Acrobat Reader , just click 
on any “hit” and the Text Frame scrolls to that spot in the source file. 



The Concordance to the Seven Volume Urtext comes in an abridged form 
on the DVD which is smaller and faster but leaves out the most common words, 
all the ifs, ands and buts. 
The Exhaustive Concordance is much larger, demands 
a faster computer, but includes everything. 
Except for this exclusion of common 
words, they are identical. 



In the left Wordlist frame are all the words in the Course, along with their 
frequency. 
You can search this or any other frame for a particular word or phrase. 

Click on the word when you’ve found it, and all instances of that word along with 
five words of context on either side appear in the upper concordance frame. 



vii 


PROO 


1981 


COPY 









































What’s on the DVD? 


The ultimate reference and look-up tool - 

The FULL Concordance to the Seven Volume Ur text 


r-.i Concordance 

whole7j.txt.Concordance 



El® SB® 

File Text Search 

Edit Headwords Contexts View Tools Help 





m g£ y # & % 

* * b s u P|, 





Headword 

No. 


Context... 


W. 


...Context 

Reference 


SEPARATION-MIND 1 

which are often associated with 

sex 

. 
+b T 1 B 24i 

T 1 B24hT(14)14 


SEPARATIONS 

1 

T 1 B 24i. 
+e 

Sex 

is often associated with lack 

T 1 B 24iT(14)14 


SEPT 

14 

in relation to question about 

sex 

. 
Tell B. 
the one more 

TIB 37nT(31)31 

<*> 

SEPTEMBER 

22 

more river is related to 

sex 

. 
You might even explain it 

TIB 37nT(31)31 

,5 

SEPULCHRE 

1 

for them to reach consciousness. 


Sex 

and miracles are both WAYS 

T 1 B 37o T(31)31 

a 

SEQUENCE 

8 

did Jack.) Your confusion of 

sex 

and statistics is an interesting 

T 1 B 37y T(34)34 


SERENE 

9 

of you, because of the 

sex 

and aggression confusion. 
+b T 

T 1 B 37y T(34)34 


SERENELY 

2 


Sex 


T 1 B 37ab T(35)35 


SERENITY 

8 


sex 


T 1 B37adT(35)35 

— 

SERIAL 

1 

to finish the instructions about 

sex 

, because this is an area 

T 1 B 40b T(37)37 


SERIES 

14 

1 B 40c. 
+e Inappropriate 

sex 

drives (or misdirected miracle-impulses) result 

T 1 B 40c T(37)37 


SERIOUS 

13 

T 1 B 40d. 
+e 

Sex 

was intended as an instrument 

T 1 B40dT(37)37 

r- 

SERIOUSLY 

9 

pleasure which is derived from 

sex 

AS SUCH is reliable only 

T 1 B 40e T(38)38 


SERPENT 

1 

The only VALID use of 

sex 

is procreation. 
It is NOT 

T 1 B 40f T(38)38 

'5 

SERVANT 

6 

of reality becomes apparent. 
The 

sex 

impulse IS a miracle impulse 

T 1 B 41t T(48)48 

! 

SERVE 

119 

person, or both, experience inappropriate 

sex 

impulses, KNOW FIRST that this 

T 1 B 41u T(48)48 


SERVED 

7 

of the DEPLETING use of 

sex 

. 
Freud's description is purely NEGATIVE 

TIB 41vT(48)48 


SERVES 

43 

also that Freud's notion of 

sex 

was as a device for 

T 1 B 41wT(49)49 


SERVICE 

23 

1 B 41 x. 
+e Inappropriate 

sex 

relaxes only in the sense 

T 1 B 41x T(49)49 

— 

SERVICEABLE 

1 

much like the confusion of 

sex 

impulses with possession-impulses. 
Some of 

T 1 B41aaT(49)49 


SERVICES 

1 

question raised by WT re 

sex 

under existing conditions) (HS raised 

T 1 B 41at T(52)52 


SERVING 

9 

B. 
both chose your present 

sex 

partners shamefully, and would have 

T 1 B41auT(52)52 


SESSIONS 

4 

body only. 
If this occurs, 

sex 

is particularly likely to be 

T 1 C 9 T(57)57 


SETS 

49 

extreme belief, 1) leads to 

sex 

crimes, and 2) to stealing 

T 1 C 11 T(58)58 

% 

SETTING 

12 

that crosses one's mind (re 

sex 

, possession, etc.) you should immediately 

T 3 E 1 T(147)146 

’ 

SETTING-OUT 

1 

not true. 
The confusion of 

sex 

with aggression, and resulting behavior 

T 4 F 18 T(224)C 51 


SETTINGS 

1 



SETTLE 

7 






SETTLED 

3 





1 

SETTLES 

1 






SETTLING 

1 






SEVEN 

1 






SEVER 

1 





1 = 

SEVERAL 

34 





3 

SEVERED 

1 






SEVERELY 

7 






SEVERITY 

1 






1 v 



Words 

T okens 

At word Word sort 

Context sort 



10864 

205343 

8772 Asc alpha (string) 

Asc occurrence order 




In this screenshot of the Full Concordance user interface we see the 
same look-up as before. 
It has all the features of the HTML Concordance , and a 
vast array of additional sophisticated text analysis capabilities. 
Unlike the HTML 
Concordance , the Complete Concordance allows complex proximity, context and 
hierarchical searching. 
We supply the data-base but not the application software 
for the Complete Concordance. 
This software and the data-base we supply is a 
must for every serious student however. 



viii 


PROOF 


1982 


COPY 













What’s on the D VD? 


To order Print Copies of this book visit 

http://www.miraclesinactionpress.com 

To preview a subset of the DVD features, visit the 
Scholar’s Toolbox Online 

http://www.miraclesinactionpress.com/dthomp74/2008 


PROOF 


1983 


COPY 




Sr- 

r — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — — 

I 

I 

I 

! DVD Order Form 


Dear Miracles in Action Press, 

Please mail my DVD(s) to: 


(Name) 




(Address) 





/ / 


/ 

(City) 

(State, Province) 

(Country) 

(Postal Code or Zip) 


(Email Address, not shared with 3 rd parties) 


_____I 


1984 

PROOF COPY 













DVD ORDER FORM 


& 

r 1 


V Qty Price to ship Subtotal 


I I @ 32.00 ea additional DVD ship to US 


(No limit) $ 

@36.00 ea additional DVD international 
(No Limit) $ 

Some countries may assess import fees which 

must be paid by buyer $ 


US Tax: included 

Shipping: included 

Total: $ 


Credit card Name: 

Credit card Address: 

City State Country 

Phone Zip/Postal Code 


Method of Payment: (Please allow 10 business days for checks to clear before shipping) 

□ Check* □ MasterCard 

□ Money Order** □ American Express 

□ Visa 

Credit Card No. 


Signature Exp. 
Date 

* Checks must be in US funds drawn on a US bank 

** International Postal Money Orders in US funds are acceptable 


Please remove and mail, fax or email this page with shipping and handling charge. 



For payment by Check Money Order or Credit Card mail this page with payment to: 

Miracles in Action Press, LLC 
52 Fitzgerald Drive 
Jaffrey, NH 03452 USA 

Or fax to: 866-683-6858 (toll free from USA only, credit card only) 

Or scan & email to: mypurchase@miraclesinactionpress.com (credit card only) 


_____I 


PROO 


1985 


COPY 
